Abstract: 
Background and Purpose: Dysmenorrhea is one the most common disorders in Gynecology, which occurs in 50% of women with regular menstrual cycls. There have been various treatment methods regarding this, among which the drugs with less side effects are preferred. The porpuse of the present study is to compare the effect of Fennelin and Mefenamic Acid on primary dysmenorrhea.
Materials and Methods: This research is the result of an experimental study at the level of a double-blind clinical trial in 2006. In this study, 104 students with moderate to severe primary dysmenorrhea were randomly selected and assigned into 3 drug-taking groups, including Fennelin (36), Mefenamic Acid (36) and Placebo (32). They were assigned to receive the relevant drugs in two successive menstrual cycles at the beginning of the pain. The selected subjects were asked to fill out the questionnaires regarding the severity of pain, hemorrhage and clinical problems in the first visit, during the first five hours, 48 hours and the first three days in two successive cycles.
Results: There were no significant differences between the 3 selected groups regarding the age and the characteristics of menstruation. The average age of the subjects was 20.7±0.16 and the average age of the beginning of primary dysmenorrhea was 15.11±0.26. 71.2 % of subjects had moderate while 28.8 % with severe dysmenorrhea. The pain severity highly decreased in Fennelin takers compared with the Placebo takers, and as the time of treatment continued, this difference increased. However, there was no significant difference between the Fennelin and Mefenamic Acid takers. The effect of Fennelin was also more than Mefenamic Acid in reducing the severity of hemorrhage. There was no significant difference between the 3 groups regarding the clinical symptoms, but there was considerable reduction in the severity of clinical problems in Fennelin takers compared with the two other groups. According to the drug-takers, Fennelin was more effective in reducing the complaints compared with Placebo; however, it had no significant difference from Mefenamic Acid.
Conclusion: The effect of Fennelin in relieving primary dysmenorrhea is not less than Mefenamic Acid, and it can be useful in reducing the severity of pain, hemorrhage and clinical symptoms. Therefore, due to the safety of herbal drugs, it can replace the chemical drugs.

 
Keyword(s): PRIMARY DYSMENORRHEA, FENELLIN, MEFENAMIC ACID
 