Food and Nutrition Bulletin, vol. 20, no. 4 © 1999, The United Nations University. 435
Abstract
Insufficient compliance has been identified as a major
contributing factor to the low effectiveness of iron-supplementation programmes. An experimental community
trial was conducted to observe the effect of a communication programme on compliance with weekly iron supplementation in urban Tanzanian adolescent schoolgirls.
A sample of 237 girls aged 14 to 17 years was randomly
recruited from five schools in Dar-es-Salaam, and randomly assigned to three groups. Group A (schools 1 and
2) received one tablet weekly containing 65 mg of elemental
iron with 0.25 mg of folic acid for eight consecutive weeks
and participated in weekly communication sessions. Group
B (school 3) received the same supplementation without
communication sessions. Group C (schools 4 and 5) served
as the control group, without supplementation or communication. Reported and observed compliance was
checked by pill counting and stool analysis. Haemoglobin
levels were determined by the cyanmethaemoglobin
method before and after intervention. A knowledge test
on iron-deficiency anaemia (causes, effects, and treatment) was carried out before and after intervention. Venn
diagrams were drawn to identify the most influential persons. Three focus group discussions with the girls and the
teachers were conducted at different stages during the study.
In the group receiving supplementation and communication, the prevalence of anaemia decreased significantly
(p < .001) from 49% to 5% in school 1 and from 54% to
23% in school 2. The prevalence of anaemia did not change
significantly in schools 3 and 4 but increased significantly
in school 5. The reported and observed compliance was
Increase in compliance with weekly iron
supplementation of adolescent girls by an
accompanying communication programme in
secondary schools in Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania
Grace S. Muro, Ursula Gross, Rainer Gross, and Lely Wahyuniar
Grace Muro is a staff member of the Tanzania Food and
Nutrition Centre in Dar-es-Salaam. Ursula Gross and Rainer
Gross are currently visiting professors in the Department of
Nutrition at the Faculty of Public Health, University of São
Paulo, Brazil. Lely Wahyuniar is a staff member of the
SEAMEO-TROPMED Regional Center for Community
Nutrition at the University of Indonesia in Jakarta.
Mention of the names of firms and commercial products
does not imply endorsement by the United Nations University.
90% and 94%, respectively, in school 1, 89% and 75%
in school 2, and 48% and 50% in school 3. The participants’ knowledge of iron-deficiency anaemia increased
significantly in all schools after the intervention (p < .001)
but was highest in schools 1 and 2, which received supplementation and communication. It is concluded that
comprehensive communication strategies can influence
the ingestion of iron supplements and therefore help to
reduce anaemia in adolescents.
Introduction
Iron-deficiency anaemia is prevalent throughout the
world, particularly in developing countries [1, 2]. It
has been calculated that nearly 1% of the gross domestic product of the developing countries is lost because
of reduced productivity and cognitive performance
caused by iron deficiency [2]. In Tanzania the prevalence of anaemia in pregnant women and children under
five years of age is as high as 80% and 45%, respectively [3]. The prevalence of anaemia in women increases
during adolescence because of the growth spurt and
menstrual losses [4, 5], coupled with inadequate diet
[6] and often aggravated by infectious diseases such as
malaria, schistosomiasis, and hookworm infection [7].
The cornerstone intervention in health service for
iron deficiency has been supplementation of pregnant
women and children with iron tablets, but the effectiveness of this approach so far has not been encouraging [8, 9]. One reason for the poor results is that
during the relatively short period of fast growth, particularly during pregnancy and infancy, iron requirements are very high. Thus it is not always possible to
absorb an adequate amount of supplementary iron,
especially for those women who are iron deficient before pregnancy. Trying to catch up on iron intake during pregnancy is too little, too late [10].
One strategy is to secure an adequate iron status
before pregnancy. Adolescent girls are an important
target group, since their high iron requirements lead
to depleted iron stores even before pregnancy [5, 9].
436
Targeting adolescent girls not only would have an immediate curative effect but also might have a longerterm preventive effect on iron deficiency during pregnancy [11]. In many societies, girls can be reached
relatively easily through schools, and an improved and
secured iron supply can be achieved by periodic supplementation under supervised conditions [7, 10].
Muhilal et al. [12] reported that 12 weeks of supervised supplementation with iron tablets reduced the
prevalence of anaemia by an average of 24% in schoolchildren. Brabin and Brabin [7] recommended that
health services switch from curative to preventive iron
supplementation and target adolescent girls rather than
children or post-adolescent and pregnant women. In
this way a greater impact on reproductive health and
reproductive success could be achieved than by supplementation during pregnancy alone. Supervised supplementation at schools and work sites ensures that the
iron tablets are properly used, and potential gains in
work productivity from correction of iron-deficiency
anaemia can justify the investment for such an effort [9].
More recently, weekly iron supplementation has been
recommended for prevention. In particular, satisfactory
efficacy was shown in adolescent girls in Indonesia [13].
Weekly administration has the advantage of fewer side
effects [14] and lower costs [15], and this approach
therefore seems to be more efficient than daily supplementation. Nevertheless, independently of the
method of administration of iron supplements, adequate
information and motivation has to be an essential part
of supplementation programmes [9].
In a plantation in Sri Lanka, Atukorala et al. [16]
found that compliance could be increased if both the
beneficial effect of supplements and the possible adverse
side effects were clearly explained. Studies of nutrition
education for school-aged children in the United States
[17] found that intervention was effective if it was relevant and behaviourally focused and if sufficient time
was devoted to the education. Contento et al. [18]
reported that interventions that focused on specific behaviours resulted in more behavioural changes than
general nutrition education programmes. Lytle [17]
showed that nutrition education interventions were
more likely to be effective when they employed educational strategies that were directly relevant to a behavioural focus and were derived from appropriate theory
and research.
In summary, focused communication programmes
could increase compliance with oral iron supplementation and, therefore, the effectiveness and efficiency
of such programmes for adolescent schoolgirls. Nevertheless, despite this commonly accepted concept, there
is little scientific evidence available on motivational programmes for iron supplementation in adolescent schoolgirls in developing countries. This study was conducted
to evaluate weekly iron supplementation strategies in
Tanzanian adolescent schoolgirls, with and without an
accompanying communication programme, for compliance and effectiveness.
Subjects and methods
Sample selection
The study was carried out between August and November 1996 in Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania. All five public
secondary schools with adolescent schoolgirls within
the city centre participated in the study. Prospective
participants were randomly selected from the different
classes and age groups of the identified schools. Girls
were eligible if they were between 14 and 17 years of
age and had already had their menarche. Written informed
consent from the girls and their parents was required.
Both anaemic and non-anaemic girls were included.
Malaria was not a factor of exclusion, because this disease is endemic in the region. However, girls suffering
from infections with fever at the time of the interview
were excluded. According to sample size calculation,
240 girls should have participated in the study [19].
However, in the end, a total of 237 subjects from a potential roster of 3,517 participated in the study, mainly
because of consent problems (missing parental approval).
The study population consisted of three groups.
Group A received supplementary iron with a communication programme, group C received supplementary
iron without a communication programme, and group
C received no intervention. Each group should have
contained a similar number of girls. However, this goal
was not reached, because after the schools had been
randomly assigned to the three groups, the parents of
the girls in school 4, who were assigned to receive iron
supplementation without communication, did not approve of their daughters receiving iron tablets. They
only allowed measurement of haemoglobin concentrations and anthropometric data. Hence, the girls from
this school were added to the non-intervention group.
Table 1 shows the final number of girls in each group.
Seventy-eight girls were enrolled in group A (schools
1 and 2: iron supplements along with communication
sessions), 39 girls in group B (school 3: iron supplementation without communication sessions), and 120
girls in group C (schools 4 and 5: neither iron supplementation nor communication sessions). Furthermore,
the intended equal representation of each grade (grades
1–3) was not reached because of restrictions on participation. In school 2, none of the students in the second grade received parental permission to participate
in the study, and the majority of the third-grade students in schools 3 and 4 were more than 17 years old.
There was no immediate remedy to the inconsistency,
since the school year was coming to an end. An operational framework of the study is depicted in figure 1,
showing the interventions performed in the three groups.
G. S. Muro et al.
437
Haemoglobin measurements
The haemoglobin concentrations of all 237 subjects were
measured twice, at baseline and after the eighth week
of intervention. Blood was obtained by skin puncture
of a left-hand finger using an automatic skin puncture device (Autoclix-Lancet, Boehringer, Mannheim,
Germany.) Haemoglobin level was determined by the
cyanmethaemoglobin method [20] with the Compur
Minilab (Bayer Diagnostic, Munich, Germany).
Distribution of iron supplements
Once weekly, each girl in groups A and B received an
iron pill containing 65 mg of elemental iron in the form
of iron sulphate and 0.25 mg of folic acid. For girls in
group A (schools 1 and 2), the trained class teachers distributed the pills during the additional communication
sessions. Group B subjects also received the pills from
the classroom teachers. All girls were instructed to take
the pills after school, so the teachers were not able to
observe the girls taking the pills. A Supplementation
Record Book was provided to each class leader for the
weekly collection of information about ingestion of the
tablets, eventual side effects, illnesses, and absenteeism
throughout the whole supplementation period.
Group C did not receive iron pills or participate in
the communication sessions during the eight-week
period. At the end of the study, all girls who were still
anaemic, including those in the control group, received
iron pills with detailed explanations as to why and how
to take them.
Focus group discussions
In schools 1 and 2 (group A), focus group discussions
were held with the girls on two occasions, and a third
focus group discussion took place with the two teachers and the two headmasters of these schools.
Before the intervention began, focus groups were
organized in schools 1 and 2. Each school had four
groups, two for girls 14 and 15 years old and two for
girls 16 and 17 years old, for a total of eight groups.
Each group had 9 or 10 randomly chosen members.
The first round of focus group discussions aimed to
identify gaps in the girls’ knowledge and vocabulary
related to iron-deficiency anaemia. This information
was used for the development of materials, teacher training, and the formulation of a pre- and post-knowledge
test. During the first round of focus group discussions,
Venn diagrams [21] were built up. A Venn diagram (John
Venn, English logician, 1834–1923) uses circles and
rectangles to present various types of mathematical sets
and to show the relationships among them. In a Venn
diagram, separate sets may be represented by two or
more separate circles and overlapping sets by two or
more overlapping circles [22]. Venn diagrams are currently used in qualitative research (e.g., focus group
discussions) to identify social relationships. Different
persons and institutions are represented as circles or
rectangles, and the importance of a person or institution to the target is represented by its distance from
the target (in this case, adolescent girls) [21]. The shorter
the distance, the greater the importance. In this study,
a pre-identified list of potentially influential persons
Increase in compliance with iron supplementation
TABLE 1. Number of participants according to treatment, school, and grade
No. of participants
Treatment School Grade Grade School Treatment
A: Intervention 1 1 17 39 78
(iron + communication) 2 12
3 10
2 1 20 39
2 –
3 19
B: Intervention 3 1 23 39 39
(iron only) 2 13
3 3
C: Control 4 1 16 40 120
(no intervention) 2 17
3 7
5 1 27 80
2 27
3 26
438
was provided to the girls. Since this list was not exhaustive, the girls added persons from their family or
the social environment whom they trusted and from
whom they would seek advice. The purpose of the Venn
diagram was to identify the most influential persons
whom the girls trusted and listened to. The diagram
was drawn on paper by the girls of the focus group.
The distance between the indicated persons and the
students represented the intensity of their relationship.
The distance was measured with a tape and recorded
for further statistical analysis. An example of a Venn
diagram is shown in figure 2.
A second round of focus group discussions (six
groups) was held with the girls in both schools after
four weeks of intervention. The first objective was to
learn the reasons for the participants’ intention to continue the iron supplementation. The second objective
was to learn about potential barriers to continuation
and ways to overcome them. Schoolgirls who had experienced side effects were purposely included in the
discussion groups. The rest of the participants were
randomly selected and equally distributed among the
three groups in the respective schools. The third objective was to discuss eventual reactions from the girls’
parents.
After the end of the intervention, another focus
group discussion was held with the two school heads
and the four implementing teachers in the two schools
FIG. 1. Operational framework
G. S. Muro et al.
439
of group A. The discussions were focused on the implementation of and possible improvements to the
pilot supplementation programme.
Communication sessions
During the intervention period, weekly communication sessions were conducted with the girls of group
A, before distribution of the tablets. The sessions lasted
approximately 45 to 60 minutes and were implemented
by the trained teachers. The training of the four teachers
(one designated teacher and her substitute from each
school of group A) aimed to increase their knowledge
of iron-deficiency anaemia and its control. The teachers were provided with two posters, one booklet, and
one brochure on anaemia. During the communication
session, all girls in group A received the same educational materials, with the exception of the posters.
Motivation and commitment-building strategies were
applied by the teachers to increase the girls’ knowledge
and to initiate a change in their attitudes. Technical
knowledge was also imparted through a short play and
a poem on anaemia that were each performed once at
each school of group A.
Compliance
“Compliance” was defined as the proportion of distributed pills that were consumed by the subjects. Thus,
during an eight-week period, the consumption of eight
pills would represent 100% compliance.
“Reported compliance” was the percentage of subjects who reported that they received and ingested the
iron supplement. This information was documented
in the Supplementation Record Book kept by the class
leader.
“Observed compliance” was the proportion of subjects who had a positive stool test related to iron ingestion. Stool samples were obtained during the third and
fifth weeks of intervention on the day after the pills
were distributed. Half of the girls in the supplementation groups were randomly chosen to provide a sample
during the third week, and the other half provided a
sample during the fifth week. The girls were provided
with small plastic containers for the samples. The test
for ingested iron was performed by the method of Afifi
et al. [23].
Side effects
Information on possible side effects was collected from
the Supplementation Record Book throughout the whole
supplementation period. The aim was to record all negative side effects as well as feelings of well-being perceived by the participants. The rate of reported side
effects in group A was higher, possibly because this group
had received information about possible side effects.
Furthermore, the list of side effects was used during
the second focus group discussion to find out if the
reported side effects could have been related to lower
compliance or to higher drop-out rates.
Personal questionnaire
Each girl completed an additional questionnaire that
asked for information on menstrual periods, socioeconomic status, environmental sanitation, and personal hygiene. The classification of the socio-economic
status of a family was based on the income of the
father. However, because of difficulties in measuring
income, the father’s occupation was used as a proxy
for income. The cluster of high-income fathers consisted of professionals such as administrators, accountants, engineers, and high-ranking officers. The middleincome fathers included teachers, technicians, clerical
officers, etc. Low-income fathers were employed as
cleaners, messengers, and drivers.
Pre- and post-knowledge test
A 25-question pre-knowledge test was conducted during
the first week in all groups to measure the students’
FIG. 2. Venn diagram showing most influential persons to
14- and 15-year-old adolescent girls
Increase in compliance with iron supplementation
440
knowledge of the causes, effects, and treatment of anaemia. The percentage of correct answers was used for
statistical evaluation. The test was repeated after the
intervention to measure increases in knowledge.
Statistical analysis
Data analysis was carried out using SPSS/PC+ version
4.0 (SPSS, Chicago, Ill, USA). For normally distributed
data, the differences between and within treatment
groups were compared with unpaired and paired t tests,
respectively. Non-parametric tests were used when values
were not normally distributed, as for haemoglobin levels
after intervention and differences between initial and
final haemoglobin. Differences between groups were
tested by the Mann-Whitney U test or the Kruskal-Wallis
H test and differences within groups by Wilcoxon’s
matched-pairs signed-rank test. The chi-squared test
was used to test for associations between variables. Differences were considered statistically significant when
p < .05.
Ethical considerations
The ethical guidelines of the Council for International
Organizations of Medical Sciences [24] were followed.
Informed consent was collected from all persons involved,
including school heads, teachers, schoolgirls, and parents. The Ethical Review Committee of the Regional
SEAMEO-TROPMED Center for Community Nutrition at the University of Indonesia in Jakarta and the
Tanzania Food and Nutrition Research and Ethics Committee approved the research proposal.
Results
Socio-economic status
Family income was classified according to the father’s
occupation. Of the 237 girls studied, 44% came from
high-income, 32% from middle-income, and 25% from
low-income families. There were no significant differences among the schools in the distribution of income
levels.
Reported compliance
The reported compliance in school 1 was high (fig. 3a).
Among 39 participating girls in school 1, 34 (87%)
received the first pill; 5 girls did not want to take the
supplement. The lowest compliance (69%) was observed
at the administration of the second tablet. The main
reason for the drop in compliance was that the parents
increasingly disapproved of their daughters’ participation
in the study after a letter in a local newspaper had
claimed that the tablets were contraceptives. Compliance increased to 90% with the third supplement after
the parents received additional information sessions
regarding the content of the iron tablets and the benefit
of their impact. Furthermore, the researcher reassured
the implementing teachers, as well as the schoolgirls,
that the supplements were not contraceptives. The reported compliance was 100% for the fourth and fifth
pills but decreased for the sixth, seventh, and eighth
pills (95%, 90%, and 85%, respectively). This decrease
was due to the absence of the girls as they prepared for
their final examinations. There were no more formal
classes, which made it difficult to assemble the girls for
the communication sessions and the distribution of pills.
The reported compliance in school 2 was satisfactory, particularly with the first, second, third, sixth, and
seventh supplements (fig. 3b). In this school no initial
refusal due to the letter in the newspaper could be observed. The decreased compliance with the fourth (74%)
and fifth (59%) tablets was due to the late arrival of
the teacher responsible for the communication and distribution session, so that some of the girls left school
without receiving the supplement. The decreased compliance with the eighth pill (90%) was due to absenteeism of the girls for the same reasons as in school 1.
The reported compliance in school 3 (iron only) was
very low compared with that in the other two schools
(iron plus communication)(fig. 3c). The percentage of
participants who reported having ingested the tablets
ranged from 18% to 90% per pill distribution day. Only
56% took the first supplement. The rest of the girls
refused to take the tablets from the teacher, although
they had signed consent letters. Also in this school, because of the negative newspaper publicity, the girls and
their parents feared that the pills were contraceptives.
The coverage was even lower for the second pill (28%).
After the girls were reassured by the researcher and the
teacher that the pills were not contraceptives but contained iron to reduce anaemia, the willingness to take
the third iron pill increased to 67%. The administration of the fourth pill had a reported compliance rate
of 90%. Since the schools were located within walking
distance of each other, a spillover of information from
school 2 could not be avoided. The girls in school 3
anticipated the day that the communication activity
(role playing) that had taken place in school 2 would
take place in their school. Since this did not happen,
the reported compliance decreased to 51% for the fifth
and sixth tablets, 28% for the seventh, and 18% for
the eighth.
In school 3 the teacher and her deputy had not been
previously trained for further motivation sessions.
Therefore they had no additional perceptions to transmit
to the girls about the importance of reducing anaemia
through iron supplementation. Lack of commitment
of the implementing teacher and her deputy may explain the increasing absenteeism of the girls in school
3. Reported compliance decreased from 51% in the
G. S. Muro et al.
441
fourth week to only 18% in the eighth week. An additional reason for absenteeism was preparation for final
examinations. However, despite the examinations, the
reported compliance in group A (iron plus communication) during the eighth week remained 85% and 90%
in schools 1 and 2, respectively.
Observed compliance
The observed compliance during the third week, as indicated by positive iron stool tests, was 100% in school
1, 93% in school 2, and 60% in school 3. In the fifth
week, the observed compliance declined to 87% in
school 1, 56% in school 2, and only 40% in school 3
(iron without communication). The reason given by
the girls whose samples tested negative was that they
forgot to take the tablets.
Negative and positive effects perceived by
participants
Five girls in school 1 (13%) and three in school 2 (8%)
reported increased appetite. Four girls, one each from
schools 1 and 2 and two from school 3 (iron only),
reported stomach irritation. Several students in all three
schools reported an increase in activity and less sleepiness, and none complained about negative side effects
such as nausea and vomiting. School 3 had the highest
percentage of girls who did not report any effects (69%).
However, in schools 1 and 2, in which communication sessions were conducted, 52% and 46%, respectively, reported no side effects.
Haematological response
There were no significant differences among the groups
in mean baseline haemoglobin. After eight weeks of
intervention, the haemoglobin level increased significantly only in the iron plus communication groups (p
< .001, Wilcoxon’s paired t test), whereas it decreased
significantly in the control group. The difference in
haemoglobin between groups A (iron plus communication) and C (control) was significant (p = .04, MannWhitney U test).
Table 2 shows the impact of the intervention on anaemia. At the beginning of the study, the overall prevalence of anaemia was 48%, ranging from 30% in school
5 to 70% in school 4. After intervention the prevalence
of anaemia decreased significantly to 5% in school 1
and 23% in school 2 (p < .001, χ
2
 test).
Pre- and post-knowledge test
To measure increases in knowledge during the intervention, the same test of knowledge was administered
in all five schools (table 3). After eight weeks, the mean
knowledge scores in all schools increased significantly
as compared with the pre-test scores (p < .001, Wilcoxon
test). The greatest increases in knowledge occurred in
schools 1 and 2, with median increases of 25% and
10%, respectively). The amount of increase in knowledge differed significantly among schools (p < .001,
Kruskal-Wallis test).
Venn diagram
Six focus groups (10 participants per group) from
schools 1 and 2 identified the most influential persons
whom the girls trusted and whom they would follow
or listen to. The Venn diagrams consistently recorded
FIG. 3. Reported compliance in school 1 (a), school 2 (b), and
school 3 (c)
Increase in compliance with iron supplementation
442
significantly larger distances for people in the social
environment than for people in the family environment (p = .001, unpaired t test). The parents (father,
mother, or both) emerged as the most powerful persons.
Discussion
The aim of this study was not to show the efficacy or
physiological effectiveness of iron supplementation,
which would require strict supervision of the intake
of the iron pills. The objective was rather to study the
effectiveness, which includes compliance with the iron
supplement intake. In particular, the effect of communication intervention was assessed, using the involvement of schoolteachers in the distribution of tablets
and the information and motivation sessions.
Two major factors influence compliance with supplementation programmes: the availability of the tablets and the willingness of the participants to ingest
them. Comprehensive communication should address
both factors simultaneously.
Effective comprehensiveness of the communication
programme was indicated by the fact that in the two
schools with communication interventions (group A),
the prevalence of anaemia was significantly reduced
in a relatively short time. In school 3, in which no training of the implementing teachers took place, reported
and observed compliance were much lower, and therefore iron supplementation had no observed effect. The
distribution of iron supplements alone did not guarantee the reduction of anaemia in the girls.
Compliance with the distribution of tablets
Several measures were undertaken to guarantee the
participation of the school staff. The headmasters were
important for the success of the supplementation measures. They were essential for the administrative support of the distribution of supplements. Their status
as the highest authority of the schools facilitated the
TABLE 2. Number and percentage of schoolgirls with anaemia before and after intervention
according to school
Anaemic Anaemic
before intervention after intervention
School Total no. No. % No. %
1: Iron + communication 39 19 49 2 5a
2: Iron+ communication 39 21 54 9 23a
3: Iron 39 21 54 21 54
4: Control 40 28 70 28 70
5: Control 80 24 30 27 34
Total 237 113 48 87 37
a. p < .001, χ
2
 test.
promotion of the supplementation programmes with
the teachers, parents, and schoolgirls.
In discussions it became obvious that the involvement of natural science teachers was particularly helpful
because of their basic knowledge of physiology, nutrition, and health. Therefore, these teachers should be
trained to implement a supplementation programme.
The training and motivation of teachers is important
in bringing about a multiplier effect of an iron supplementation programme among adolescent schoolgirls. A well-planned communication strategy applied
to secondary school students is a precondition for high
compliance, which leads to high effectiveness of iron
supplementation.
The intake of iron supplement in the school creates
severe ethical and practical problems, particularly if the
supplement has to be taken in the presence of a teacher.
In the long run, voluntary intake after motivational strategies seems to be more effective than supervised intake.
In this intervention, the girls perceived unsupervised
ingestion of the iron supplements as “becoming an
adult.” They described tablet ingestion as “cool,” and a
certain peer pressure was created.
Compliance of schoolgirls
According to the Venn diagrams, parents had the most
TABLE 3. Summary of pre- and post-knowledge test performance for all schools
Median % correct answers
School n Before After Differencea
1 39 41 58 25
2 39 45 58 10
3 39 53 63 6
4 40 29 38 7
5 80 49 52 3
a. All before–after differences are significant (p < .001, Wilcoxon test).
G. S. Muro et al.
443
influence on the girls. This fact was not considered at
the beginning of the study. The denial of this fact created severe problems, since the parents were suspicious
that the girls would receive not iron supplements but
contraceptives. Only after intensive additional information and communication were provided to the parents did they give permission for their daughters to
participate in the study. Parents must be included as
communication channels and act as motivators to bring
about and maintain a high compliance rate. For the
identification of interpersonal channels, the Venn diagram proved to be an appropriate instrument.
Side effects
Negative side effects of taking iron are the most frequently suggested explanation for non-compliance with
iron regimes [25]. In a study by Bonnar et al. [26], onethird of the women did not take their iron prophylaxis because of the fear of gastrointestinal side effects,
although only 3% of these women actually reported
to have experienced such upset.
The results of our study showed that awareness of
possible side effects did not frighten the adolescents,
as mentioned in the focus group discussions. All participants considered the advantages of the iron supplement to be greater than possible side effects. The
one girl who had diarrhoea and the three who had stomach irritation said they would continue taking the iron
pills despite the effects. They argued: “We know about
the need to elevate our haemoglobin levels because of
menstrual losses, exposure to mosquitoes, and the dirty
environment, so we want to have enough iron stores
in case we get infected. At home, we rarely eat foods
like meat, fish, or liver, and we want to be on the safe
side because blood transfusions in severe anaemic cases
might contaminate one with diseases such as AIDS.”
Furthermore, the girls mentioned that they were not
worried about the side effects because they had been
informed about the symptoms. Moreover, if side effects
occurred, they did not last long, according to the students.
These findings lead to the suggestion that the positive attitude towards the supplementation was fostered
by the information sessions, since the teachers considerably increased the girls’ knowledge of iron-deficiency
anaemia, as shown by the differences between the preand post-knowledge test scores. These teachers were
motivated to transfer their newly gained knowledge
through different means and ways of communication
to the adolescents. Charoenlarp et al. [27] reported that
high drop-out rates could be attributed to lack of motivation of health personnel responsible for distributing medication to the participants in an iron-supplementation study. Insufficient correct knowledge of
iron-deficiency anaemia by health personnel might be
another factor contributing to low compliance.
Among different classes and age groups, the interest
and motivation increased in the group receiving iron
plus communication (as expressed by the compliance
data), despite the fact that they had to gather voluntarily in their free time for the communication sessions,
which were sometimes changed without clear announcements by the teachers. The girls had to come to school
for the communication sessions, even when they had
no formal classes and were preparing for their final
examinations.
The positive effect of being more active, which was
observed by 26% of the girls in school 1 and 23% of
the girls in school 2, as compared with 18% in school
3 (iron only), may be due to increased haemoglobin
levels, or it may be just a psychological effect, since they
had been informed about the positive effects of ingesting
iron pills. Two studies of female factory workers in Indonesia found that the work output of anaemic women
was lower, even if they performed only very light activities [28, 29]. They also spent fewer hours on homework
and leisure than their non-anaemic colleagues [28].
The sleepiness mentioned in all three groups might
be related to the stress of final examinations. The lowest percentage of girls who reported negative or positive side effects was in group B (31%), who had no
communication sessions and were not informed about
possible effects of the iron supplement, as compared
with 48% (school 1) and 54% (school 2) of girls in
group A. However, as shown above, the well-informed
and motivated participants could tolerate negative side
effects without reducing compliance.
Conclusions
A high prevalence of anaemia (48%) justifies the urgent
need for an adequate design of an iron-supplementation programme for adolescents in Tanzania. The lack
of effective supplementation programmes in pregnant
women requires new ways to alleviate iron-deficiency
anaemia. Preventive iron supplementation in adolescence, which increases low iron stores and maintains
high iron stores, has been shown to be a feasible alternative, as long as effective communication measures
accompany the distribution of tablets.
Adequate communication strategies require the development of adequate communication tools and messages, with participation of the target groups. Moreover, as the problems of compliance during the first weeks
of the study showed, the selection and utilization of
the most effective channels of communication are of
essential importance. When schoolchildren are the target,
parents—who were the most influential channel for
the girls in this study—need to be well integrated from
the beginning of the planning of a supplementation
programme. However, under different sociocultural
conditions, different channels may have more influence
Increase in compliance with iron supplementation
444
on the opinions, practices, and behaviours of schoolgirls. Therefore, instruments such as the Venn diagram
must be utilized to identify these channels before the
development of communication tools and messages.
In many countries, most of the economic efforts
within the education sector are devoted to infrastructure development, teacher training, and curriculum
development. However, all expenditures lead to very
limited results as long as the learning capacity of schoolchildren is physiologically constrained by micronutrient deficiency. The study showed that weekly iron supplementation in adolescent schoolgirls can reduce irondeficiency anaemia and therefore help to improve their
cognitive performance as long as comprehensive communication measures are included. Therefore, appropriate communication programmes should be developed to accompany weekly supplementation
programmes to improve the cognitive performance of
schoolchildren and reduce the number of women who
enter pregnancy with depleted iron stores.
References
1. DeMaeyer E, Adiels-Tegman M. The prevalence of anemia
in the world. World Health Stat Q 1985;38:302–16.
2. Viteri FE. The consequences of iron deficiency and
anemia in pregnancy. In: Allen L, King J, Lonnerdal B,
eds. Nutrient regulation during pregnancy, lactation and
infant growth. New York: Plenum Press, 1994:121–33.
3. Kavishe FP, Ljunqqvist BG, Ballart RA. Maternal nutrition and the outcome of pregnancy. The Ilula village
case study, Tanzania. In: Donald N, ed. Proceedings of
the 6th Annual Scientific Conference of the TPHA
Morogoro, Tanzania. Dar-es-Salaam: Tanzanian International Marketing, 1987:87–109.
4. Dallman PR. Adolescence: a second high-risk period.
In: Fomon SJ, Zlotkin S, eds. Nutritional anemias. New
York: Nestlé Nutrition Workshop Series 1992;30:29–38.
5. Fomon SJ, Zlotkin S., eds. Nutritional anemias. New York:
Nestlé Nutrition Workshop Series 1992;30.
6. Allen LH. Iron-deficiency anemia increases risk of
preterm delivery. Nutr Rev 1993;51:49–52.
7. Brabin L, Brabin B. Parasitic infections in women and
their consequences. Am J Clin Nutr 1992;55:955–8.
8. Baker SJ, DeMaeyer EM. Nutritional anemia: its understanding and control with special reference to the work
of the World Health Organization. Am J Clin Nutr 1979;
32:368–417.
9. Yip R. Iron supplementation during pregnancy: Is it effective? Am J Clin Nutr 1996;61:1164–5.
10. De Pee S, Graciano F. Iron deficiency anemia in Indonesia. Report of the Policy Workshop. Jakarta: Helen
Keller International, 1997.
11. Schultink W, Gross R. Iron deficiency alleviation in developing countries. Nutr Res Rev 1996;9:281–93.
12. Muhilal, Sumarno I, Komari. Review of surveys and supplementation studies of anemia in Indonesia. Food Nutr
Bull 1996;17:3–6.
13. Angeles-Agdeppa I, Schultink W, Sastroamidjojo S, Gross
R, Karyadi D. Weekly micronutrient supplementation
to build iron stores in female Indonesian adolescents.
Am J Clin Nutr 1997;66:177–83.
14. Schultink W. Iron-supplementation programmes: compliance of target groups and frequency of tablet intake.
Food Nutr Bull 1996;17:22–6.
15. Gross R, Angeles-Agdeppa I, Schultink W, Dillon D,
Sastroamidjojo S. Daily versus weekly iron supplementation: programmatic and economic implications for
Indonesia. Food Nutr Bull 1997;18:64–70.
16. Atukorala TM, Silva LD, Dechering WHJC, Dassenaeike
TS, Perera RS. Evaluation of effectiveness of iron-folate
supplementation and anthelminthic therapy against
anemia in pregnancy: a study in the plantation sector
of Sri Lanka. Am J Clin Nutr 1994;60:286–92.
17. Lytle L. Nutrition education for school-aged children. J
Nutr Educ 1995;27:298–328.
18. Contento I, Bach G, Bronner YL, Lytle LA, Maloney SK,
Olson CM, Swadener SS, Randell JS. The effectiveness
of nutrition education and implications for nutrition
education policy, program and research: a review of research. J Nutr Educ 1995;27:279–83.
19. Milton SJ. Statistical methods in the biological and health
sciences. 2nd ed. New York: McGraw Hill International,
1992.
20. International Nutritional Anemia Consultative Group.
Iron deficiency in women. Washington, DC: INACG and
Nutritional Foundation, 1984.
21. Barnhart CL, Barnhart RK. The world book dictionary.
Vol 2, L-Z. Chicago, Ill, USA: World Book, Nault WH
Publisher, 1993.
22. Pretty JN, Guijt I, Scoones I, Thompson J. Participatory
learning and action: a trainers’ guide. IIED participatory methodology series. London: International Institute for Environment and Development, 1995:242–3.
23. Afifi AM, Banwell GS, Bennison RJ, Boothby K. Simple
test for ingested iron in hospital and domiciliary practice. BMJ 1996;1:1021–2.
24. Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences. International guidelines for ethical review of epidemiological studies. Geneva: CIOMS, 1991.
25. Safe Motherhood. Iron supplementation during pregnancy:
Why aren’t women complying? WHO/Maternal and Child
Health 90.5. Geneva: World Health Organization, 1990.
26. Bonnar J, Goldberg A, Smith JA. Do pregnant women
take their iron? Lancet 1969;i:457–8.
27. Charoenlarp P, Dhanamitta S, Kaewvichit R, Silpraset
A, Suwanaradd C, Na-Nakorn S. A WHO collaborative
study on iron supplementation in Burma and Thailand.
Am J Clin Nutr 1988;47:280–98.
28. Scholz B, Gross R, Schultink W, Sastroamidjojo S. Anaemia is associated with reduced productivity of women
workers even in less physically strenuous tasks. Br J Nutr
1997;77:47–57.
29. Untoro J, Gross R, Schultink W. The association between
BMI and haemoglobin and productivity among Indonesian female workers. Eur J Clin Nutr 1998;52:131–5.
G. S. Muro et al.