ORIGINAL INVESTIGATION
Intramuscular aripiprazole for the treatment of acute
agitation in patients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective
disorder: a double-blind, placebo-controlled comparison
with intramuscular haloperidol
Raisa Andrezina & Richard C. Josiassen &
Ronald N. Marcus & Dan A. Oren & George Manos &
Elyse Stock & William H. Carson & Taro Iwamoto
Received: 30 January 2006 /Accepted: 28 July 2006 / Published online: 5 September 2006
# Springer-Verlag 2006
Abstract
Introduction This double-blind, placebo-controlled study
investigated the efficacy and safety of intramuscular (IM)
aripiprazole and IM haloperidol for the treatment of acute
agitation in patients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective
disorder.
Materials and methods Four-hundred and forty-eight
patients were randomized (2:2:1 ratio) to IM aripiprazole
9.75 mg, IM haloperidol 6.5 mg, or IM placebo. Patients
could receive up to three injections over the first 24 h, with
second and third injections administered ≥2 and ≥4 h,
respectively, after the first if deemed clinically necessary.
Primary efficacy measure was mean change in Positive and
Negative Syndrome Scale Excited Component (PEC) score
from baseline to 2 h.
Results Mean improvement in PEC at 2 h was significantly
greater for IM aripiprazole (−7.27) vs placebo (−4.78;
p<0.001); IM aripiprazole was noninferior to IM haloperidol (−7.75) on PEC. All secondary efficacy measures
showed significantly greater improvements at 2 h for IM
aripiprazole and IM haloperidol over placebo. Mean
number of injections/patient and percentage of patients
requiring benzodiazepines were significantly lower for IM
aripiprazole vs placebo (p<0.01). IM aripiprazole was well
tolerated. Extrapyramidal symptom-related adverse events
were similar for aripiprazole (1.7%) and placebo (2.3%)
and lower than with haloperidol (12.6%).
Conclusion These results show that IM aripiprazole is an
effective treatment, comparable to IM haloperidol, and
well-tolerated for acute agitation in patients with
schizophrenia.
Keywords Acute agitation . Intramuscular antipsychotic
therapy. Intramuscular aripiprazole . Intramuscular
haloperidol . Efficacy . Safety
Introduction
Patients with schizophrenia and related disorders frequently
experience agitation during acute exacerbation of their
illness. Because such agitation is often accompanied by
Psychopharmacology (2006) 188:281–292
DOI 10.1007/s00213-006-0541-x
Joint first authorship for authors Raisa Andrezina and Richard
Josiassen.
R. Andrezina
Department of Psychiatry, Riga Mental Health Care Centre,
Tvaika Street 2,
Riga 1005, Latvia
R. C. Josiassen (*)
Arthur P. Noyes Research Foundation,
Department of Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania,
1001 Sterigere Street,
Norristown, PA 19401, USA
e-mail: richardjosiassen@noyesfoundation.net
R. N. Marcus: D. A. Oren : G. Manos: E. Stock
Bristol-Myers Squibb Company,
5 Research Parkway,
Wallingford, CT 06492, USA
W. H. Carson
Otsuka America Pharmaceutical Inc.,
100 Overlook Drive,
Princeton, NJ 08540, USA
T. Iwamoto
Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd.,
2-9 Kanda Tsukasa-cho,
Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101 8535, Japan
violent and/or destructive behavior, rapid intervention is
required to protect the patient and caregivers. Short-term
intramuscular (IM) treatment with typical antipsychotics
and/or benzodiazepines is widely used in these situations
(Hughes and Kleespies 2003); however, their use is limited
by significant safety concerns. IM benzodiazepines may
cause respiratory depression and excessive sedation (oversedation), or induce paradoxical behavioral disinhibition,
leading to a worsening of the episode (Stimmel 1996). IM
typical antipsychotics, such as haloperidol, are associated
with a significant risk of extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS),
including akathisia and acute dystonia, electrocardiogram
(ECG) abnormalities, oversedation, and neuroleptic malignant syndrome (Hassaballa and Balk 2003; Hughes and
Kleespies 2003). Such adverse events can prove distressing
to patients and may adversely impact on their acceptance
of, and adherence to, future antipsychotic therapy.
Atypical antipsychotics show an improved safety and
tolerability profile over typical agents suggesting that IM
formulations of atypical agents could provide superior
management of acute agitation in patients with schizophrenia. Clinical studies have demonstrated the efficacy of IM
formulations of olanzapine (Breier et al. 2002; Wright et al.
2001) and ziprasidone (Daniel et al. 2001; Lesem et al.
2001) for the treatment of acute agitation in schizophrenia,
and these treatments have been approved for use in the
USA and some European countries.
Oral aripiprazole therapy has demonstrated efficacy in
controlling the symptoms of schizophrenia, including
agitation, in short-term trials in patients experiencing acute
relapse (Kane et al. 2002; Potkin et al. 2003), as well as
during long-term maintenance therapy after relapse (Kasper
et al. 2003) and in chronic stable patients (Pigott et al.
2003). Oral aripiprazole has also demonstrated broad
effectiveness in large prospective, open-label, naturalistic
studies in general outpatient psychiatric practice settings
(Beuzen et al. 2006; Tandon et al. 2006). Additionally, oral
aripiprazole has a good safety and tolerability profile, with
a low liability for EPS, sedation, weight gain, elevated
prolactin levels, and QTc prolongation on ECGs (Kasper et
al. 2003; Marder et al. 2003; McQuade et al. 2004).
The safety and efficacy of IM aripiprazole in the
management of acute agitation have previously been
assessed in a dose-ranging study investigating IM aripiprazole doses of 1–15 mg/injection (Modell et al. 2004). The
results of that study suggested that a dose of 9.75 mg/
injection (to approximate a dose of 10 mg/injection, 1.3 ml
of a 7.5-mg/ml solution was administered) would be the
most appropriate to investigate further. This paper reports a
double-blind, placebo-controlled study comparing IM aripiprazole 9.75 mg and IM haloperidol 6.5 mg for the
management of acute agitation in patients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder.
Materials and methods
The study was conducted in accordance with the generally
accepted standards for the protection of patient safety and
welfare, and the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki
and its amendments, and in compliance with the Good
Clinical Practice. The study was explained to prospective
patients or their legally authorized representatives (as
defined by local policy or law), and patients or their
representatives gave consent by signing and dating the
informed consent form before any protocol required
procedures were performed.
Patients
The study involved voluntarily hospitalized men and
women, aged at least 18 years old, who were experiencing
acute agitation and who had a diagnosis of schizophrenia or
schizoaffective disorder, as defined by DSM-IV criteria
(APA 1994) and confirmed by Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI) (Sheehan et al. 1998). The
study was conducted while patients were hospitalized;
patients were not intentionally hospitalized for the purposes
of the study. Patients were also required to have Positive
and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) Excited Component (PEC) scores of ≥15 and ≤32, and a score of ≥4
(moderate) on at least two of the five PEC items.
In addition, patients were required to: be appropriate
candidates for parenteral treatment because, according to
the judgment of the attending physician, they were
clinically agitated; be able to be reliably rated on the
psychiatric scales used in the study; be able to comprehend
and satisfactorily comply with the protocol requirements;
be willing to discontinue all psychotropic medication for
the duration of the study; and be able to give informed
consent themselves and/or have a legally acceptable
representative give informed consent. Women of childbearing potential must have been using an adequate method of
contraception to avoid pregnancy throughout the study and
for up to 8 weeks after the study.
Exclusion criteria included: a diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder; a psychiatric diagnosis other than
schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder requiring pharmacotherapy; patients with a significant risk of committing
suicide based on their medical history or routine psychiatric
status examination; any clinically significant neurologic
diagnoses (including migraine, epilepsy, Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease, multiple sclerosis, residual of
stroke, transient cerebral ischemic attacks, cerebral palsy,
and mental retardation); a history of seizures; a history of
abnormal electroencephalogram, severe head trauma, or
stroke or evidence of other unstable medical conditions that
would expose them to an undue risk of a significant adverse
282 Psychopharmacology (2006) 188:281–292
event or interfere with assessments of safety or efficacy
during the trial; any substance or alcohol dependence
within 2 months before the study; any suspected substance-induced psychiatric disorder or behavioral disturbance; history of neuroleptic malignant syndrome from
antipsychotic agents; use of benzodiazepines or anticholinergics within 4 h before the first injection of study
medication; and lack of response to previous antipsychotic
medication.
Study design
This was a double-blind, randomized, multicenter study
comparing IM aripiprazole and IM haloperidol with
placebo in the treatment of acute agitation in voluntarily
hospitalized patients with a diagnosis of schizophrenia or
schizoaffective disorder. The study was conducted at 68
centers in the USA (n=40), Czech Republic (n=6), France
(n=6), Estonia (n=3), Latvia (n=3), Poland (n=3), Croatia
(n=3), Italy (n=1), Puerto Rico (n=1), South Africa (n=1),
and Spain (n=1); a range of 1–31 patients were enrolled per
center. The study was conducted between 1 December 2003
and 15 June 2004. After a screening period (lasting 2–
12 h), patients were randomized in a 2:2:1 ratio to three
treatment groups: aripiprazole, haloperidol, and placebo.
Randomization was conducted via a centralized call-in
system and was organized by study center using permuted
block randomization. Treatment was given by IM injection,
and patients could receive up to three injections over the
24-h IM treatment period. Baseline evaluations had to be
performed within 1 h before the first injection. A second
injection could be administered if deemed necessary at least
2 h after the first injection, and a third could be
administered at least 2 h after the second injection and at
least 4 h after the first injection. The last injection was to be
given not later than 20 h after the first injection. For
patients in the placebo group, the third injection was
aripiprazole 9.75 mg/injection.
Aripiprazole was administered at a dose of 9.75 mg/
injection (to approximate a dose of 10 mg/injection, 1.3 ml
of a 7.5-mg/ml solution was administered; maximum of
29.25 mg during IM treatment). This dose was based on the
results of a dose-ranging study reported elsewhere (Modell
et al. 2004). Haloperidol was administered at a dose of
6.5 mg/injection (1.3 ml of a 5-mg/ml solution; maximum
of 19.5 mg during IM treatment), a dose well within the
range approved for standard IM use.
Patients who completed the IM phase entered the oral
treatment phase during which they received oral aripiprazole (aripiprazole and placebo groups) or haloperidol
once daily for 4 days. The results of the oral phase are
not included in this report and will be presented
elsewhere.
Efficacy assessments
The primary efficacy outcome measure was the mean
change in PEC score from baseline to 2 h after first
injection [last observation carried forward (LOCF) analysis]. The PEC consists of five items on the PANSS total
scale (hostility, lack of cooperation, excitement, poor
impulse control, and tension), with each item scored on a
scale of 1 (absent) to 7 (extreme). The PEC is a validated
instrument that allows assessment of the antiagitation
effects of antipsychotic treatment and is particularly useful
in acute treatment settings (Lindenmayer et al. 2004). It is a
physician-rated observation that avoids the need for
interaction between the patient and physician that could
exacerbate agitation.
The following secondary outcome measures were also
used to assess symptom severity/improvement during the
study: Clinical Global Impression-Improvement (CGI-I)
scale, Clinical Global Impression-Severity of Illness
(CGI-S) scale (Guy 1976), Agitation–Calmness Evaluation
Scale (ACES) (Battaglia et al. 2003), and the Corrigan
Agitated Behavior Scale (CABS) (Corrigan and Bogner
1994). In addition, the PANSS-derived Brief Psychiatric
Rating Scale (BPRS) was used to assess the severity of
symptoms associated with schizophrenia.
Efficacy assessments were performed at baseline (except
CGI-I) and at the following times during IM treatment:
30 min, 45 min, 1, 1.5, 2, 4, 6, 12, and 24 h after first
injection. In addition, efficacy assessments were made just
before repeat injections of study drug or concomitant
lorazepam therapy. Efficacy evaluations for repeat injections were performed at 1 and 2 h after injection. PANSSderived BPRS was determined at baseline and at 2 and
24 h.
Experienced raters administered the efficacy scales, and
every effort was made to ensure that the same rater
administered the scales for a given patient. Interrater
reliability was achieved by rater training, at an investigator
meeting and via electronic media based on guidelines
established by an expert rater panel, and reassessment of
raters several months after initial rater approval. To
consider variability across study centers, and due to the
large number of study centers, analyses were adjusted for
an overall country effect.
Safety assessments
Adverse events were monitored and recorded throughout
the study, and investigators assessed events for severity and
their likely relationship to study medication. In addition,
EPS were evaluated using the Simpson–Angus Scale (SAS)
(Simpson and Angus 1970) and the Barnes Akathisia
Rating Scale (BAS) (Barnes 1989), with assessments
Psychopharmacology (2006) 188:281–292 283
performed at baseline and at 2, 4, 6, 12, and 24 h after first
injection. Laboratory tests were performed at baseline and
were repeated at 24 h. Vital signs (standing and supine
blood pressures) were performed at 1, 2, 4, 6, 12, and 24 h.
If patients received a second or third injection, vital sign
measurements were also performed 30 min and 1 h after
these injections. A standard 12-lead ECG was performed at
baseline and 24 h (and at 1 h after each injection, if
performed). In addition, patients were continuously monitored with an ambulatory 12-lead monitor from 2 h before
baseline until 22 h, and tracings were evaluated at 30 min
and 1, 1.5, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 12 h after first injection and at
30 min after the second and third injections, if performed.
Concomitant medication
During the study, administration of the following medications were prohibited: neuroleptic agents other than study
medication; diphenhydramine and other antihistamines for
the treatment of agitation, anxiety, or insomnia; other
psychotropic medications such as antidepressants and mood
stabilizers; and benzodiazepines with the exception of
lorazepam (up to 4 mg/day) or an equivalent agent which
could be given if deemed clinically necessary by the
investigator after the primary endpoint assessment.
Statistical analysis
The study aimed to enroll at least 420 patients to obtain 400
evaluable patients (i.e., IM aripiprazole, n=160; IM haloperidol, n=160; IM placebo, n=80) having a baseline PEC
assessment and at least one PEC assessment after the first
injection. This sample size would yield 90% power to show
noninferiority of IM aripiprazole to IM haloperidol when
the noninferiority bound for the difference in the mean
changes from baseline in PEC scores was 2.5. This
assumed an expected difference in mean changes from
baseline of 0.5 (in favor of haloperidol), a standard
deviation of 5.5, and a two-sided test at the 0.05 level of
significance. This sample size would also be powered at
99% to differentiate between placebo and IM aripiprazole
when the true difference in the mean changes from baseline
in PEC score was 3.4, assuming a standard deviation of 5.5
and a two-sided test at the 0.05 level of significance.
Efficacy analyses were based on the study population
consisting of all patients who were randomized to treatment, who received at least one dose of study medication,
and who had at least one postrandomization efficacy
evaluation and a corresponding baseline value (not applicable to CGI-I). The safety sample included all patients
who were randomized to treatment and who received at
least one dose of study medication. An LOCF approach
was used; however, data relating to the first injection were
not carried forward when considering data relating to the
second injection.
The primary efficacy measure was the mean change
from baseline to 2 h in the PEC score (LOCF analysis). It
was evaluated by the analysis of covariance (ANCOVA)
model that included terms for treatment, country, and
baseline score. Model-based mean change from baseline
in the PEC score by treatment group and the treatment
differences vs placebo were conducted. To preserve the
experiment-wise type I error rate at 0.05, the two research
hypotheses involving the primary efficacy measure were
tested sequentially. First, a two-sided test to compare IM
aripiprazole vs placebo was performed at the 0.05 significance level. Then, and only if the former test yielded a
positive result favoring IM aripiprazole, the noninferiority
hypothesis of IM aripiprazole to IM haloperidol was tested.
The upper limit of the 95% confidence interval (CI) for the
contrast of IM aripiprazole vs IM haloperidol was compared to a noninferiority bound that equaled 40% of the
observed mean change from baseline at 2 h in the IM
haloperidol treatment group to show that IM aripiprazole
retained 60% of the efficacy of IM haloperidol.
In addition to the primary analysis, the changes from
baseline in the scores for PEC, CGI-S, ACES, CABS,
PANSS-derived BPRS, SAS, and BAS assessments at all
time points were evaluated by ANCOVA. Model-based
mean change from baseline in the scores by treatment group
and all pairwise treatment differences (with 95% CI) were
analyzed. The treatment differences in CGI-I and number of
injections per patient were analyzed using the Cochran–
Mantel–Haenszel (CMH) Row Means Score test. Treatment
differences in the response rate (defined as a ≥40% decrease
in PEC score from baseline) and percentage of patients
receiving benzodiazepines were analyzed using the CMH
General Association test. Treatment differences in time to
the second injection were analyzed using the Cox’s
proportional hazards model.
Results
Patient disposition and baseline characteristics
In total, 448 patients were randomized to the three
treatments groups: IM aripiprazole, n=175; IM haloperidol,
n=185; IM placebo, n=88. The demographic and psychiatric characteristics of patients, together with their baseline
efficacy ratings, are summarized in Table 1. The three
treatment groups were well balanced with respect to
demographic and disease characteristics and baseline
ratings. Patients had a mean age of 41.5 years, 61% were
men, two-thirds (66%) were Caucasian, and 73% had a
diagnosis of schizophrenia. The mean age at diagnosis was
284 Psychopharmacology (2006) 188:281–292
26.3 years. In total, 68% of the patients received an
antipsychotic medication within the day before the study
(13% received only typical antipsychotics; 42% received
only atypical antipsychotics; and 13% received both typical
and atypical antipsychotics), and 10% received a benztropine within that day. Of those who received benztropines
in the day before the study, 93% also received an
antipsychotic.
Study treatment
In all, 435 patients (97%) completed IM treatment. Thirteen
patients discontinued from IM therapy, with a small
percentage of patients discontinuing from each group (IM
aripiprazole, 2.9% [n=5]; IM haloperidol, 3.8% [n=7]; IM
placebo, 1.1% [n=1]). The reasons for discontinuation were
as follows: withdrawal of consent (n=5), adverse event
(n=3), lack of efficacy (n=2), lost to follow-up (n=1), poor/
noncompliance (n=1), and other (n=1).
The mean number of IM injections that patients received
was similar for the two active treatments (IM aripiprazole,
1.54; IM haloperidol, 1.43) and significantly lower than for
the placebo group (IM placebo, 1.92; p<0.001 vs IM
aripiprazole and IM haloperidol). Overall, 41% of IM
aripiprazole-treated patients and 34% of IM haloperidoltreated patients received a second injection compared with
57% of those receiving placebo. Furthermore, the time to
receiving a second or third injection was significantly
shorter for the placebo group compared with both active IM
treatment groups (p<0.005).
Similarly, the percentage of patients receiving concomitant benzodiazepines and the mean number of doses they
received during IM treatment were higher for the placebo
group (19% and 1.47, respectively) compared with the IM
aripiprazole (8%; 1.07) and IM haloperidol (12%; 1.10)
groups. The difference in percentage of patients receiving
benzodiazepines was statistically significant for IM aripiprazole vs placebo (p<0.008) and showed a trend toward
significance for IM haloperidol vs placebo (p<0.096).
Efficacy assessments
Improvements in PEC scores from baseline were observed
for all three IM treatment groups. The improvement in PEC
score at 2 h (from baseline) was significantly greater for IM
aripiprazole (−7.27) and IM haloperidol (−7.75) compared
with placebo (−4.78; p<0.001). Analysis of the change in
PEC score at 2 h for IM aripiprazole and IM haloperidol
according to the noninferiority hypothesis indicated that IM
aripiprazole was noninferior to IM haloperidol. In addition,
at 2 h after the first injection, the percentage of patients
achieving a response (defined as a reduction in PEC score
from baseline of ≥40%) was significantly greater for the IM
aripiprazole (55%) and IM haloperidol (58%) groups
compared with placebo (36%; p<0.005).
Analysis of PEC scores over the first 2 h of IM treatment
showed that the response to active treatment was rapid, and
the improvement of symptoms was similar for IM aripiprazole and IM haloperidol. For the IM aripiprazole group, the
PEC score differed significantly from placebo at 1 h after
the first injection, while a significant difference was
achieved at 45 min in the IM haloperidol group (Fig. 1).
However, there was no significant difference in the
improvement in the PEC scores between the IM aripiprazole and IM haloperidol groups at these time points. There
was also no difference between the two groups at 30 min or
2 h; however, the difference at 90 min was significant in
favor of IM haloperidol (p=0.022).
Further analysis of the change in PEC at 2 h showed
significantly greater improvements with both IM aripiprazole and IM haloperidol treatments compared with placebo
in the subpopulation of patients with schizophrenia (Fig. 2)
Table 1 Demographic and psychiatric characteristics and baseline
efficacy ratings
IM placebo
(n=88)
IM aripiprazole
(n=175)
IM haloperidol
(n=185)
Mean age
(years)
40.3 41.9 41.8
Gender
Male (%) 63 63 59
Race (%)
White 68 70 61
Black/African
American
31 27 35
Other 1 3 4
Underlying
diagnosis (%)
Schizophrenia 74 71 73
Schizoaffective
disorder
26 29 27
Mean baseline
ratings
PEC 18.74 18.82 18.79
CGI-S 4.38 4.38 4.39
ACES 2.23 2.19 2.21
CABS 28.49 29.69 29.31
PEC Five items, each rated from 1 (absent) to 7 (extreme). Total score
ranges from 5 to 35.
CGI-S scale General illness severity, rated from 1 (normal) to 7
(extremely ill).
ACES 9-point scale, rated from 1 (marked agitation) to 9 (unarousable).
CABS 14 items, each rated from 1 (absent) to 4 (extreme). Total score
ranges from 14 to 56.
IM Intramuscular, PEC Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale
Excited Component, CGI-S Clinical Global Impression-Severity of
Illness, ACES Agitation–Calmness Evaluation Scale, CABS Corrigan
Agitated Behavior Scale
Psychopharmacology (2006) 188:281–292 285
and among patients with more severe agitation at baseline
(baseline PEC score >18) (Fig. 2). Few patients in the study
were oversedated (where oversedation was defined as an
ACES score of 8 or 9) with IM aripiprazole (n=16; 9%), IM
haloperidol (n=28; 15%), or placebo (n=5; 6%). A
subanalysis that excluded the patients who were oversedated also showed significantly greater improvements in
PEC scores at 2 h with IM aripiprazole and IM haloperidol
vs placebo (Fig. 2); thus, the efficacy observed in this study
was not dependent on oversedation.
Changes in the secondary efficacy measures at 2 h were
consistent with the results for PEC scores. Mean changes in
CGI-S, ACES, and CABS scores and mean CGI-I scores
were indicative of improvement in symptoms for both
active treatment groups, and for all measures, the changes
observed with IM aripiprazole and IM haloperidol were
statistically significantly greater than with placebo at 2 h
(Table 2). As for the PEC scores, the improvements seen
with IM aripiprazole treatment were generally rapid.
Statistically significant improvements compared with placebo were observed at 45 min and 1 h after the first
injection for CABS and CGI-I assessments, respectively
(p<0.05).
In addition, mean changes in PANSS-derived BPRS
score at 2 h were significantly greater for both active
treatments compared with placebo (IM aripiprazole, −8.56;
IM haloperidol, −8.80; IM placebo, −5.42; p<0.005 vs IM
placebo), indicating that symptoms associated with the
underlying disease also responded to IM aripiprazole and
IM haloperidol.
A total of 183 patients received a second injection, of
whom 182 were evaluable (IM aripiprazole, n=70; IM
haloperidol, n=62; IM placebo, n=50). Of these patients,
111 were nonresponders to the first injection (IM aripiprazole, n=38; IM haloperidol, n=34; IM placebo, n=39). The
mean reduction in PEC score (from the score before the
second injection) was significantly greater at 1 and 2 h for
both active IM treatments compared with placebo for the
total population receiving a second injection and for the
subgroup of nonresponders (Table 3). Similarly, mean
CGI-I scores at 1 and 2 h after the second injection were
also significantly better with both IM aripiprazole and IM
haloperidol treatments compared with placebo (p<0.001).
Safety
A total of 445 patients were included in the safety analysis.
Adverse events
During the course of IM treatment, the most frequently
reported adverse events (i.e., occurring in at least 5% of
patients) were headache, dizziness, nausea, and insomnia in
the IM aripiprazole group and insomnia, headache, and
extrapyramidal disorder in the IM haloperidol group
(Table 4). Most reported adverse events were mild or
moderate in severity. The incidence of sedation-related
adverse events (i.e., sedation or somnolence) was low and
similar in the IM aripiprazole and IM haloperidol groups
(IM aripiprazole, 6.3%; IM haloperidol, 6.0%; IM placebo,
Fig. 1 Mean change in PEC
score from baseline over the first
2 h after injection (LOCF).
PEC = Positive and Negative
Syndrome Scale Excited
Component
286 Psychopharmacology (2006) 188:281–292
3.4%). Of the 183 patients who received a second injection,
58 (32%) experienced onset or increased severity of an
adverse event after the second injection, and the incidence
was highest for the IM haloperidol group (IM aripiprazole,
33.3%; IM haloperidol, 44.3%; IM placebo, 14.0%). The
most frequently reported adverse events (≥5%) showing
new onset or increased severity were insomnia and
agitation in both the IM aripiprazole and IM haloperidol
groups, headache in the IM haloperidol group, and nausea
in the IM aripiprazole group.
Table 3 Mean reduction in PEC score at 1 and 2 h after the second
injection (from PEC score before the second injection)
IM
placebo
IM
aripiprazole
IM
haloperidol
All patients n=50b n=70 n=62
Mean PEC at baselinea 18.88 17.20 16.87
Mean reduction at 1 h −2.18 −4.41* −5.48**
Mean reduction at 2 h −2.16 −5.92** −6.73**
Nonresponders to first
injection
n=39c n=38 n=34
Mean PEC at baselinea 18.95 17.92 17.76
Mean reduction at 1 h −1.23 −3.64* −5.09**
Mean reduction at 2 h −1.16 −4.49* −6.48**
a Baseline Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale Excited Component
(PEC) score before second injection
b n=49 at 1 h c n=38 at 1 h
*p<0.02 vs placebo
**p<0.001 vs placebo
IM Intramuscular
Table 2 Summary of secondary efficacy assessments (CGI-I, CGI-S,
ACES, and CABS) at 2 h after first injection (LOCF)
Assessment IM placebo
(n=88)
IM aripiprazole
(n=175)
IM haloperidol
(n=185)
CGI-I 3.10 2.42** 2.37**
CGI-S −0.71 −1.16** −1.17**
ACESa 0.83 1.41* 1.64**
CABS −4.51 −8.03** −8.28**
Values are mean change from baseline, except CGI-I score which is
the mean score.
a ACES score represents improvement in agitation (i.e., calming).
*p≤0.05 vs placebo
**p≤0.01 vs placebo
IM Intramuscular, CGI Clinical Global Impression, CGI-I CGIImprovement, CGI-S CGI Severity of Illness, ACES Agitation–
Calmness Evaluation Scale, CABS Corrigan Agitated Behavior Scale,
LOCF last observation carried forward
Fig. 2 Mean change in PEC
score from baseline to 2 h
(LOCF) in subpopulations of
patients with schizophrenia,
patients with more severe agitation at baseline (PEC score
>18), and patients who were not
oversedated (oversedation =
ACES score of 8 or 9).
PEC = Positive and Negative
Syndrome Scale Excited
Component
Psychopharmacology (2006) 188:281–292 287
The incidence of IM injection site reactions (defined as
injection site burning, pain, and stinging) was low in all
three treatment groups (IM aripiprazole, 3.4%; IM haloperidol, 1.1%; IM placebo, 2.3%).
During the course of the study, eight patients experienced serious adverse events: four in the IM aripiprazole
group and four in the IM haloperidol group. All of these
events occurred after the completion of IM treatment.
Only one incident of very severe dystonia experienced by
a patient in the IM haloperidol group was regarded as
being related to treatment; the other events—psychotic
disorder, schizophrenia, and hallucination—were regarded
as being related to the underlying disease. No patients
died during the study.
In total, three patients discontinued from the study due to
adverse events during IM treatment. There was one
discontinuation from the IM aripiprazole group, which was
due to agitation and musculoskeletal stiffness, both of which
were considered possibly related to medication. In the IM
haloperidol group, two patients discontinued due to adverse
events during IM therapy. Of these patients, one discontinued due to akathisia, which was considered related to
medication, while the other discontinued due to elevated
blood glucose (not treatment-related). No patients discontinued from the placebo group due to adverse events during
IM treatment.
Extrapyramidal symptoms
The incidence of EPS-related adverse events was similar for
the IM aripiprazole (1.7%) and placebo groups (2.3%) and
much lower than in the IM haloperidol group (12.6%). This
difference between IM aripiprazole and IM haloperidol was
supported by results from rating scale assessments of abnormal
movements at 24 h (Table 5). The IM aripiprazole group
showed a decrease in SAS and BAS scores from baseline to
24 h. The IM haloperidol group showed a small increase in
SAS score and small decrease in BAS score at 24 h.
Laboratory evaluations and vital signs
No patients withdrew from the study due to clinical
concerns regarding vital signs, and only one patient in the
IM haloperidol group withdrew due to abnormal laboratory
findings—a potentially, clinically significant increase in
fasting blood glucose levels during IM treatment which was
regarded as unrelated to study medication. The percentage
of patients with potentially, clinically significant changes in
vital signs or potentially, clinically relevant laboratory
abnormalities was similar across all treatment groups, with
the exception of increased fasting blood glucose levels,
which was most prevalent in the IM haloperidol group
compared with placebo (IM haloperidol, 35%; IM aripiprazole, 23%; IM placebo, 18%). However, fasting blood
glucose levels were elevated at baseline in approximately
half of these patients.
Electrocardiograms
No patients discontinued from the study because of an ECG
abnormality. There were no clinical concerns regarding
ECG measurements of rate, rhythm, conduction, infarction,
or increased ST/T morphology. There were no noteworthy
treatment differences vs placebo in any QTc intervals
(QTcB, QTcN, and QTcF) with standard 12-lead ECGs or
ambulatory 12-lead ECGs, and there were no treatment
differences by time point using either standard or ambulatory 12-lead ECGs. Furthermore, there were no clinically
significant differences vs placebo for the IM aripiprazole
and IM haloperidol treatment groups on the mean change
from baseline to highest and endpoint (LOCF) QTc results,
regardless of correction formula used (QTcB, QTcN, and
QTcF).
Table 5 Mean changes in SAS and BAS scores from baseline to the
end of IM treatment
IM placebo IM aripiprazole IM haloperidol
SAS
Mean
baseline (n)
12.10 (86) 11.84 (175) 11.91 (182)
End of IM
treatment (n)
−0.02 (86) −0.32 (175) +0.11* (182)
BAS
Mean
baseline (n)
0.56 (87) 0.58 (175) 0.59 (182)
End of IM
treatment (n)
−0.11 (87) −0.15 (175) −0.07 (182)
*p=0.003 vs aripiprazole
IM Intramuscular, SAS Simpson–Angus Scale, BAS Barnes Akathisia
Rating Scale
Table 4 Incidence of frequently occurring adverse events during IM
treatment (at least 5% of patients in any treatment group; safety
sample)
IM placebo
(n=87)
IM aripiprazole
(n=175)
IM haloperidol
(n=183)
Headache 6 (6.9) 13 (7.4) 15 (8.2)
Dizziness 2 (2.3) 11 (6.3) 7 (3.8)
Nausea 1 (1.2) 10 (5.7) 2 (1.1)
Insomnia 8 (9.2) 10 (5.7) 22 (12.0)
Agitation 5 (5.8) 7 (4.0) 8 (4.4)
Extrapyramidal
disorder
0 1 (0.6) 10 (5.5)
IM Intramuscular
288 Psychopharmacology (2006) 188:281–292
Discussions
The results of this study demonstrate that IM aripiprazole
provides rapid and effective control of acute agitation in
patients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder. The
superiority of IM aripiprazole over placebo was demonstrated by the significant improvements in symptoms, as
assessed by the primary efficacy measure, PEC, at 2 h
postinjection. Statistical comparison of the PEC results at
endpoint demonstrated the noninferiority of IM aripiprazole
compared with IM haloperidol. Results for all of the
secondary efficacy measures, including response rate, at
2 h postinjection confirmed the superiority of IM aripiprazole over placebo and its noninferiority to IM haloperidol.
The improvement in agitation symptoms was achieved
rapidly with IM aripiprazole, with significant improvements
observed within 1 h of the first IM aripiprazole injection
compared with placebo. Significant improvements in the PEC
score vs placebo were achieved at 45 min with IM
haloperidol; however, there was no significant difference
between the improvements observed with the two active
treatments at these time points. In addition, the onset of action
of IM haloperidol in this study is in contrast to the results of
another clinical study in patients with agitation associated
with schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, or schizophreniform disorder (Modell et al. 2004). In that study, reductions
in PEC scores were significantly greater with IM aripiprazole
9.75 mg vs placebo at 45 min, while the difference between
IM haloperidol 7.5 mg and placebo did not reach statistical
significance until 105 min (Modell et al. 2004). Thus, the
difference in speed on onset of 15 min observed here is
unlikely to be of clinical relevance.
Therapy with IM aripiprazole was well tolerated. The
adverse events observed during IM therapy corresponded to
the favorable safety profile that is well-established for oral
aripiprazole in clinical studies and clinical practice (Kane et
al. 2002; Kasper et al. 2003; Marder et al. 2003; Pigott et al.
2003; Potkin et al. 2003). In particular, the incidence of
EPS-related adverse events was low (1.7%) and comparable
with placebo (2.3%) in contrast to a much higher incidence
in the IM haloperidol group (12.6%). During IM treatment,
SAS scores improved from baseline in the IM aripiprazole
group compared with a worsening in the IM haloperidol
group. The high liability for EPS with IM haloperidol limits
its overall effectiveness in the management of acute
agitation. Adverse events such as dystonia and akathisia,
which are frequently observed with IM haloperidol
(Hughes and Kleespies 2003), can prove distressing for
patients and their families and may adversely affect
attitudes and adherence to future antipsychotic medication.
Oversedation is another side effect that can limit the
effectiveness of treatment for agitation, as it can interfere
with the physician’s ability to interview and evaluate the
patient, and establish an effective therapeutic alliance with
them. In the current study, improvements in ACES scores at
2 h were significantly greater with IM aripiprazole vs
placebo, with mean scores approaching 4 (normal functioning) in the IM aripiprazole group. Few patients in the
IM aripiprazole group experienced ACES score of 8 (deep
sleep) or 9 (unarousable) in the 2 h after injection,
suggesting that IM aripiprazole treatment had a calming
effect that with a low liability for oversedation. This is
supported by the low incidence of sedation-related adverse
events (i.e., sedation and somnolence) reported during IM
treatment. It is interesting to note that subpopulation
analysis, which excluded the small proportion of patients
whose improvements in efficacy may have been at least
partly attributable to oversedation, showed improvements in
PEC scores with IM aripiprazole vs placebo. These results
in patients who were not oversedated are consistent with
those observed in the total population. Thus, the efficacy of
IM aripiprazole in the total population did not appear to be
dependent on oversedation.
This is the second study to examine the efficacy, safety,
and tolerability of IM aripiprazole for the management of
acute agitation in schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder.
The results of this study confirm those previously reported
for a dose-ranging study of IM aripiprazole (1–15 mg/
injection) (Modell et al. 2004). In the dose-ranging study,
significantly greater improvements in PEC scores were
observed with 5.25, 9.75, and 15 mg doses/injection (0.7,
1.3, and 2.0 ml of a 7.5-mg/ml solution, respectively, were
administered) of IM aripiprazole and IM haloperidol 7.5 mg
vs placebo at 2 h after injection. Onset of action with IM
aripiprazole was rapid; significant improvements in PEC
scores over placebo were seen at 45 min and 1 h after
injection with IM aripiprazole 9.75 mg and IM aripiprazole
15 mg, respectively (Modell et al. 2004).
The results of the current IM aripiprazole study are
consistent with study findings with IM formulations of
olanzapine and ziprasidone. In a similar randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled study, IM olanzapine
(10 mg/injection) showed superiority to placebo and noninferiority to IM haloperidol (7.5 mg/injection) at 2 h after
injection for PEC, ACES, and Agitation Behavior Scale
efficacy assessments (Wright et al. 2001). In an IM
olanzapine dose-ranging study, improvements in PEC
scores and PEC response rates 2 h after injection did not
differ significantly between IM haloperidol and IM olanzapine 5, 7.5, and 10 mg groups (Breier et al. 2002). While
studies of comparable design have not been performed with
IM ziprasidone, an open-label study suggested improved
efficacy for flexibly dosed IM ziprasidone over IM
haloperidol at the end of up to 3 days of IM treatment in
patients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder
(Brook et al. 2005). Other studies have shown improved
Psychopharmacology (2006) 188:281–292 289
efficacy (as assessed by Behavioral Activity Rating Scale
scores) during the first 4 h postinjection with IM ziprasidone 10 or 20 mg/injection vs a pseudoplacebo of IM
ziprasidone 2 mg/injection in patients with agitation
associated with psychiatric disorders (Daniel et al. 2001;
Lesem et al. 2001).
It should be noted that the study reported here included a
specific population of voluntarily hospitalized patients with
schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder. While the
patients had to meet specific criteria with respect to
agitation for enrollment (PEC scores ≥15 and ≤32; score
of ≥4 on ≥2 items), their level of agitation was not so
pronounced that they could not give informed consent or
participate in the study. Additional studies may be needed
to determine if the results of this study generalize to
patients with more severe agitation, who are not able to sign
informed consent.
Although the rapid control of agitation is the primary
goal in the management of patients with schizophrenia who
present with acute agitation (Currier and Trenton 2002), the
longer-term effects of therapy should also be considered.
Patients initially treated with an IM antipsychotic will
typically transition to the oral formulation of the same
antipsychotic for the long-term management of their
disorder. Thus, the long-term safety and tolerability of oral
therapy is important as it can affect treatment adherence and
long-term patient health (McCreadie 1996). For example,
treatment-associated sedation can have an adverse impact
on patient quality of life and social integration during
longer-term treatment (Hofer et al. 2002). An antipsychotic
agent with a low potential for sedation may, therefore,
prove a more effective long-term option in terms of overall
patient outcome. Similarly, treatment with antipsychotic
agents that are associated with significant risk of weight
gain, glucose dysregulation, and dyslipidemia, such as oral
olanzapine (ADA/APA/AACE/NAASO 2004; Lieberman
et al. 2005; McQuade et al. 2004; Melkersson and Dahl
2004; Newcomer 2005), may have serious implications for
the long-term health of patients.
In summary, this study confirms that IM aripiprazole is
superior to placebo and demonstrates that IM aripiprazole is
noninferior to IM haloperidol, with an improved safety and
tolerability profile compared with IM haloperidol for the
treatment of acute agitation in patients with schizophrenia
or schizoaffective disorder. IM aripiprazole is expected to
improve the treatment options for the management of acute
agitation, allowing patients to receive effective treatment
with minimal risk of adverse effects.
Acknowledgments We would like to thank all of the principal
investigators who participated in this study: Mocrane Abbar, M.D.
(Hospital Caremeau Service de Psychiatrie, Nimes, France); Jose Alvarez,
M.D. (Comprehensive Neurosciences of Melbourne, Melbourne, FL,
USA); Professor Raisa Andrezina (Department of Psychiatry, Riga Mental
Health Care Centre, Riga, Latvia); Mohammed Abdul Bari, M.D.
(Synergy Research Center, San Diego, CA, USA); Louise Beckett,
M.D. (IPS Research Company, Oklahoma City, OK, USA); Miguel
Bernardo-Arroyo, M.D. (Hospital Clinic Servicio de Psiquiatria,
Barcelona, Spain); Daniel Bonnaffoux, M.D. (CHS du Jura, Dole,
Cedex, France); Jeffrey Borenstein, M.D. (The Holliswood Hospital,
Comprehensive Neuroscience Inc., Holliswood, NY, USA); Ronald
Brenner, M.D. (Neurobehavioral Research, Lawrence, NY, USA);
David W. Brown, M.D. (Community Clinical Research Inc., Austin,
TX, USA); Richard M. Bunt, M.D. (MedPsych Specialists, Decatur, GA,
USA); Osvaldo Caro, M.D. (First Hospital Panamericano, Unidad,
Ponce, Puerto Rico); James C.Y. Chou, M.D. (New York University
School of Medicine, Bellevue Hospital Center, NY, USA); Wlodzimierz
Chrzanowski, M.D. (Samodzielny Publicczny Zaklad, Psychiatrycznej
Opieki Zdrowotnej, Choroszcz K/Bialegostoku, Poland); Daniel Dassa,
M.D. (Hospital Timone Adultes, Marseille, Cedex, France); Thierry
Della, M.D. (Centre Hospitalier des Pyrenees, SAAU, Pau, France); Ivan
Drabek, M.D. (Psychiatricka Lecebna Opava, Opava, Czech Republic);
Katrin Eino, M.D. (Department of Psychiatry, North Estonia Regional
Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia); Larry Ereshefsky, Pharm.D. (California
Clinical Trials Medical Group, Glendale, CA, USA); David Howard
Flaherty, D.O. (Segal Institute for Clinical Research, North Miami, FL,
USA); Vera Pavo Filakovic, M.D. (Clinical Hospital Osijek, Psychiatric
Clinic, Osijek, Croatia); Folnegovic-Smalc, M.D., Ph.D. (Psychiatric
Hospital Vrapce, Zagreb, Croatia); Franco Garonna, M.D. (Azienda
Sanitaria Ulss 3, Reparto Di Psichiatria Ospedale Civile, Bassano Del
Grappa, Italy); Ramanath Gopalan, M.D. (Comprehensive Neurosciences
of Northern Virginia, Falls Church, VA, USA); Sanjay Gupta, M.D.
(Global Research and Consulting, Olean, NY, USA); George A.D. Hart,
M.B., C.H.B. (Tara Hospital, Hurlingham Gauteng, South Africa);
Jaromir Hons, M.D. (University Hospital Clinic of Psychiatry, Hradec
Kralove, Czech Republic); Kadri Jaanson, M.D. (South Estonia Hospital,
Psychiatry, Meegomae, Vorumaa, Estonia); Richard Jaffe, M.D. (Belmont
Center for Comprehensive Treatment, Philadelphia, PA, USA); Jiri
Janatka, M.D. (Central Military Hospital Clinic of Psychiatry, Prague,
Czech Republic); Richard Josiassen, Ph.D. (Arthur P. Noyes Research
Foundation, Norristown, PA, USA); Mary Ann Knesevich, M.D.
(University Hills Clinical Research, Irving, TX, USA); Chandra S.
Krishnasastry, M.D. (Clinical Research Services at Tennessee Christian
Medical Center, Madison, TN, USA); Gunnar Larson, M.D. (C.C.R.I.
Zablocki-Milwaukee VAMC, Milwaukee, WI, USA); Bum Soo Lee, M.
D. (Anaheim Research Center, LLC, Anaheim, CA, USA); Michael
Lesem, M.D. (Claghorn-Lesem Research Clinic, LLC, Bellaire, TX,
USA); Michael T. Levy, M.D. (Behavioral Medical Research of Staten
Island, Staten Island, NY, USA); Keh-Ming Lin, M.D., M.P.H. (Harbor
UCLA Research and Education Institute, South Torrance, CA, USA);
David E. Linden, M.D. (Linden Research Consultants, LLC, Oklahoma
City, OK, USA); Adam Lowy, M.D. (Comprehensive Neuroscience Inc.,
Psychiatric Institute of Washington, Washington, DC, USA); Raymond
Manning, M.D. (California Neuropsychopharmacology Research Institute–Los Angeles, LLC, Pico Rivera, CA, USA); David M. Marks, M.D.
(Optimum Health Services, La Mesa, CA, USA); Denis Mee-Lee, M.D.
(Hawaii Clinical Research Center, Honolulu, HI, USA); Ricky S.
Mofsen, D.O. (Clinical Research Inc., St. Louis, MO, USA); Pavel
Mohr, M.D., Ph.D. (Psychiatricke Centrum Praha, Prague, Czech
Republic); Ljiljana Moro, M.D. (Clinical Hospital Rijeka, Psychiatric
Clinic, Rijeka, Croatia); Izabela Niewiadomska-Marko, M.D. (Szpital
IM. Jana Pawla II, Oddzial Psychiatrii, Nowy Targ, Poland); Anand K.
Pandurangi, M.D. (Medical College of Virginia, Richmond, VA, USA);
Michael Plopper, M.D. (Sharp Mesa Vista Hospital, San Diego, CA,
USA); Pauline S. Powers, M.D. (Department of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA);
Sohail Punjwani, M.D. (Segal Institute for Clinical Research, North
Miami, FL, USA); Ants Puusild, M.D. (Parnu Hospital, Department of
Psychiatry, Parnu, Estonia); Jiri Raboch, M.D. (General University
Hospital Clinic of Psychiatry, Prague, Czech Republic); Joachim D.
290 Psychopharmacology (2006) 188:281–292
Raese, M.D. (Behavioral Health 2000, LLC, Riverside, CA, USA);
Rakesh Ranjan, M.D. (Rakesh Ranjan, M.D., and Associates Inc.,
Lyndhurst, OH, USA); Paulis Revelis, M.D. (Jelgava Psychiatry Hospital,
Jelgava, Latvia); Vitalijs Rodins, M.D. (Department of Psychiatry, Strenci
Psychiatry Hospital, Strenci, Latvia); David Sack, M.D. (Comprehensive
Neuroscience Inc., Cerritos, CA, USA); Scott Daniel Segal, M.D. (Segal
Institute for Clinical Research, North Miami, FL, USA); Anantha Shekhar,
M.D., Ph.D. (Indiana University Adult Psychiatry, Indianapolis, IN,
USA); Michael Smith, M.D. (Harbor UCLA Research and Education
Institute, South Torrance, CA, USA); Richard M. Steinbook, M.D.
(Department of Psychiatry, University of Miami School of Medicine,
Miami, FL, USA); Jaroslaw Strzelec, M.D. (NZOZ Wolmed, Dubie GM.
Szczercow, Dubie, Poland); Jaromir Svestka, M.D. (University Hospital
Clinic of Psychiatry, Brno-Bohunice, Czech Republic); Tram K. TranJohnson, Pharm.D., Psy.D. (California Neuropsychopharmacology Clinical Research Institute–San Diego, LLC, San Diego, CA, USA);
Madeleine M. Valencerina, M.D. (Neogenics Clinical Trials, La Palma,
CA, USA); Nadine Wertenschlag, M.D. (Etablissement Public de Sante
Alsace, Nord Service du Dr. Brunner, Brumath, Cedex, France); Georges
Zaykine, M.D. (Clinique Sainte-Therese, Narbonne, France); Dan L.
Zimbroff, M.D. (Pacific Clinical Research Medical Group, Upland, CA,
USA).
This study was supported by Bristol-Myers Squibb Company
(Princeton, NJ) and Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. (Tokyo, Japan).
References
ADA/APA/AACE/NAASO (2004) Consensus development conference on antipsychotic drugs and obesity and diabetes. American
Diabetes Association; American Psychiatric Association; American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists; North American
Association for the Study of Obesity. Diabetes Care 27:596–601
APA (1994) Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM-IV), 4th edn. American Psychiatric Association, Washington,
DC
Barnes TR (1989) A rating scale for drug-induced akathisia. Br J
Psychiatry 154:672–676
Battaglia J, Lindborg SR, Alaka K, Meehan K, Wright P (2003)
Calming versus sedative effects of intramuscular olanzapine in
agitated patients. Am J Emerg Med 21:192–198
Beuzen J-N, Schirr K, Pans M, Hagens P, Kostic D, Carson W, Auby
P (2006) Effectiveness of aripiprazole in a naturalistic setting: a
European multicenter study. Schizophr Res 81 (Suppl 3):39
Breier A, Meehan K, Birkett M, David S, Ferchland I, Sutton V,
Taylor CC, Palmer R, Dossenbach M, Kiesler G, Brook S,
Wright P (2002) A double-blind, placebo-controlled doseresponse comparison of intramuscular olanzapine and haloperidol
in the treatment of acute agitation in schizophrenia. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 59:441–448
Brook S, Walden J, Benattia I, Siu CO, Romano SJ (2005) Ziprasidone
and haloperidol in the treatment of acute exacerbation of
schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder: comparison of intramuscular and oral formulations in a 6-week, randomized, blindedassessment study. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 178:514–523
Corrigan JD, Bogner JA (1994) Factor structure of the Agitated
Behavior Scale. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol 16:386–392
Currier GW, Trenton A (2002) Pharmacological treatment of psychotic
agitation. CNS Drugs 16:219–228
Daniel DG, Potkin SG, Reeves KR, Swift RH, Harrigan EP (2001)
Intramuscular (IM) ziprasidone 20 mg is effective in reducing
acute agitation associated with psychosis: a double-blind,
randomized trial. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 155:128–134
Guy W (1976) Clinical Global Impressions (CGI) ECDEU Assessment Manual for Psychopharmacology. US Department of
Health, Education, and Welfare Publication (ADM) 76–338.
National Institute of Mental Health, Rockville, MD, pp 218–222
Hassaballa HA, Balk RA (2003) Torsade de pointes associated with
the administration of intravenous haloperidol: a review of the
literature and practical guidelines for use. Expert Opin Drug Saf
2:543–547
Hofer A, Kemmler G, Eder U, Honeder M, Hummer M, Fleischhacker
WW (2002) Attitudes toward antipsychotics among outpatient
clinic attendees with schizophrenia. J Clin Psychiatry 63:49–53
Hughes DH, Kleespies PM (2003) Treating aggression in the
psychiatric emergency service. J Clin Psychiatry 64:10–15
Kane JM, Carson WH, Saha AR, McQuade RD, Ingenito GG,
Zimbroff DL, Ali MW (2002) Efficacy and safety of aripiprazole
and haloperidol versus placebo in patients with schizophrenia and
schizoaffective disorder. J Clin Psychiatry 63:763–771
Kasper S, Lerman MN, McQuade RD, Saha A, Carson WH, Ali M,
Archibald D, Ingenito G, Marcus R, Pigott T (2003) Efficacy
and safety of aripiprazole vs. haloperidol for long-term
maintenance treatment following acute relapse of schizophrenia.
Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 6:325–337
Lesem MD, Zajecka JM, Swift RH, Reeves KR, Harrigan EP (2001)
Intramuscular ziprasidone, 2 mg versus 10 mg, in the short-term
management of agitated psychotic patients. J Clin Psychiatry
62:12–18
Lieberman JA, Stroup TS, McEvoy JP, Swartz MS, Rosenheck RA,
Perkins DO, Keefe RS, Davis SM, Davis CE, Lebowitz BD,
Severe J, Hsiao JK (2005) Effectiveness of antipsychotic drugs
in patients with chronic schizophrenia. N Engl J Med
353:1209–1223
Lindenmayer JP, Brown E, Baker RW, Schuh LM, Shao L, Tohen M,
Ahmed S, Stauffer VL (2004) An excitement subscale of the
Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale. Schizophr Res 68:331–337
Marder SR, McQuade RD, Stock E, Kaplita S, Marcus R, Safferman
AZ, Saha A, Ali M, Iwamoto T (2003) Aripiprazole in the
treatment of schizophrenia: safety and tolerability in short-term,
placebo-controlled trials. Schizophr Res 61:123–136
McCreadie RG (1996) Managing the first episode of schizophrenia:
the role of new therapies. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 6:S3–S5
McQuade RD, Stock E, Marcus R, Jody D, Gharbia NA, Vanveggel S,
Archibald D, Carson WH (2004) A comparison of weight change
during treatment with olanzapine or aripiprazole: results from a
randomized, double-blind study. J Clin Psychiatry 65:47–56
Melkersson K, Dahl ML (2004) Adverse metabolic effects associated
with atypical antipsychotics: literature review and clinical
implications. Drugs 64:701–723
Modell S, Daniel D, Stock E, Wilber R, Marcus R, Carson W, Manos G
(2004) Intramuscular aripiprazole treatment for acute agitation in
patients with psychosis. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 7(Suppl 1):
S417
Newcomer JW (2005) Second-generation (atypical) antipsychotics
and metabolic effects: a comprehensive literature review. CNS
Drugs 19:1–93
Pigott TA, Carson WH, Saha AR, Torbeyns AF, Stock EG, Ingenito
GG (2003) Aripiprazole for the prevention of relapse in stabilized
patients with chronic schizophrenia: a placebo-controlled 26-
week study. J Clin Psychiatry 64:1048–1056
Potkin SG, Saha AR, Kujawa MJ, Carson WH, Ali M, Stock E,
Stringfellow J, Ingenito G, Marder SR (2003) Aripiprazole, an
antipsychotic with a novel mechanism of action, and risperidone
vs placebo in patients with schizophrenia and schizoaffective
disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry 60:681–690
Sheehan DV, Lecrubier Y, Sheehan KH, Amorim P, Janavs J, Weiller E,
Hergueta T, Baker R, Dunbar GC (1998) The Mini-International
Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I.): the development and
validation of a structured diagnostic psychiatric interview for
DSM-IV and ICD-10. J Clin Psychiatry 59:22–33; quiz 34–57
Psychopharmacology (2006) 188:281–292 291
Simpson GM, Angus JW (1970) A rating scale for extrapyramidal
side effects. Acta Psychiatr Scand Suppl 212:11–19
Stimmel GL (1996) Benzodiazepines in schizophrenia. Pharmacotherapy
16:148S–151S; discussion 166S–168S
Tandon R, Marcus RN, Stock EG, Riera LC, Kostic D, Pans M, McQuade
RD, Nyilas M, Iwamoto T, Crandall DT (2006) A prospective,
multicenter, randomized, parallel-group, open-label study of aripiprazole in the management of patients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder in general psychiatric practice: Broad Effectiveness
Trial With Aripiprazole (BETA). Schizophr Res 84:77–89
Wright P, Birkett M, David SR, Meehan K, Ferchland I, Alaka KJ,
Saunders JC, Krueger J, Bradley P, San L, Bernardo M, Reinstein
M, Breier A (2001) Double-blind, placebo-controlled comparison
of intramuscular olanzapine and intramuscular haloperidol in the
treatment of acute agitation in schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry
158:1149–1151
292 Psychopharmacology (2006) 188:281–292