Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=iobs20
Download by: [Australian Catholic University] Date: 15 August 2017, At: 12:27
Acta Obstetricia et Gynecologica Scandinavica
ISSN: 0001-6349 (Print) 1600-0412 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/iobs20
Randomized study of non-closure of peritoneum in
lower segment cesarean section
Hans S. Grundsell, Diaa E. E. Rizk & Rachna M. Kumar
To cite this article: Hans S. Grundsell, Diaa E. E. Rizk & Rachna M. Kumar (1998) Randomized
study of non-closure of peritoneum in lower segment cesarean section, Acta Obstetricia et
Gynecologica Scandinavica, 77:1, 110-115
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00016349808565823
Published online: 03 Aug 2009.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 3
View related articles
Citing articles: 11 View citing articles 
Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 1998; 77: 110-1 15
Primed in Denmark - all rights reserved
Copj~right 0 Aclo Obstet Gynecol Scond 1998
Ada Obstetricia et
Gynecologica Scandinavica
ISSN 0001 -6349
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Randomized studv of non-closure of
peritoneum in lower segment cesarean sect~on
From the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
United Arab Emirates University, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates
Acta Obstet GynecoI Scand 1998; 77: 110-1 15. O Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 1998
Background. The advantages of non-closure of the visceral and parietal peritoneum at lower
segment cesarean section seems to be evident but in the reports published so far, the number
of patients studied has been relatively small and the follow-up periods short. It is obviously
of value to reconfirm such important observation in several institutions and therefore, in
1991, we decided to study non-closure of the peritoneum in lower segment cesarean section
in a large series of patients with long-term follow-up of at least one year.
Methods. A prospective randomized study of 361 patients undergoing lower segment cesarean
section in a University Affiliated Hospital, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates. The operative
technique was randomized to include either non-closure of both visceral and parietal peritoneum (study group, n=179 ) or closure of both layers (control group, n=182). Patients were
followed up according to a study protocol. The nursing staff and the obstetricians responsible
for data collection were unaware as to which of the two groups the patients belonged to.
Student-t test and Chi-square test were used for statistical analysis of the results, where appropriate, with a p<O.O5 considered probability level to reflect significant differences.
Results. Postoperative febrile morbidity and wound infection were significantly lower in the
study group as compared to the control group (pC0.001and pC0.05 respectively). The incidence of wound dehiscence, urinary tract infection and the time to opening of the bowels
postoperatively were similar in the two groups. In the non-closure group, the average operating time was significantly shorter by 7.9 minutes (pC0.01) and the hospital stay was one day
less (p<0.01). There were no patients with late postoperative complications or readmissions
during 2-5 years of follow-up that could be attributed to complications associated with lower
segment cesarean section.
Conclusion. Non-closure of the visceral and parietal peritoneum at lower segment cesarean
section is associated with fewer postoperative complications, is more cost effective and is
simpler than the traditional operative technique of closing both peritoneal layers.
Key words: cesarean section; lower segment; peritoneal closure
Submitted 23 September, 1996
Accepted 22 May, I997
In lower segment cesarean section (LSCS) operation, the surgical approach originally described
by Kerr in 1926, has been closure of the visceral
peritoneum across the uterine incision as well as
the parietal peritoneum (1). Visceral peritoneal integrity was thought to prevent adhesion formation
between the uterus and surrounding tissues and
Abbreviation:
LSCS: lower segment cesarean section.
structures and to protect the peritoneal cavity from
postpartum infection. Closing the parietal peritoneum as a separate layer from the remainder of
the abdominal wall at laparotomy has been a timehonored surgical tradition believed to facilitate approximation of the fascia1 layers by keeping abdominal contents out of the operative field and
therefore prevent wound dehiscence (2).
The value of closure of both layers of the peritoneum in patients undergoing laparotomy has been
8 Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 77 (1998)
Downloaded by [Australian Catholic University] at 12:27 15 August 2017 
Peritoneal closure in cesarean section 1 1 1
challenged in the surgical literature for the past 30
years with increasing evidence indicating that nonclosure of the peritoneum does not increase postoperative morbidity nor the incidence of wound
dehiscence (3-7). Several recent studies have also
demonstrated that this is a safe procedure in patients undergoing cesarean section which is associated with fewer postoperative adhesions, less risk
of ileus, better wound healing and rapid coverage
of injured peritoneal surfaces (8-1 0). Non-closure
of the peritoneum also reduces operating time with
the possible benefits including less exposure of the
operative field to exogenous micro-organisms, decreased adverse effects of anesthetic agents and potential cost and time savings in the operating
room.
The present study compared the short and longterm postoperative effects of closure of the visceral
and parietal peritoneum with non-closure of both
layers at LSCS operation performed through
either a lower midline or a low transverse abdominal incision. The hypothesis tested was that nonclosure of the peritoneum might benefit the patient
in the form of fewer postoperative problems and a
smoother postoperative course and the institution
in the form of less cost per operation.
Materials and methods
A prospective randomized study was conducted at
Tawam Hospital, a Ministry of Health University
Affiliated Hospital, The Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, United Arab Emirates University,
Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates. From November
1, 1991 to July 1, 1994, 361 women delivered by
LSCS through either a lower midline or a low
transverse abdominal incision gave their informed
consent to participate in the study. The study was
approved by the Research Ethical Committee of
the Faculty and The Hospital Review Board for
Research and Clinical Trials. A random selection
table was used to assign patients to closure (I?=
182) or non-closure (12 = 179) of both visceral and
parietal peritoneum.
A standard technique was performed in all operations. The transverse lower segment uterine incision was closed with 2 layers of continuous 0 polyglactin (vicrylB) suture, both layers of the peritoneum with a continuous 00 polyglactin suture and
the fascia with a continuous 0 polyglactin suture
leaving the subcutaneous layer unsutured. The skin
was approximated with either a continuous subcuticular 000 polyglactin suture or interrupted polyamide (ethilona) sutures. Sterilization at the time
of operation was by the Pomeroy technique using
00 polyglactin suture for tuba1 ligation. Urinary
catheters were routinely inserted before making the
skin incision and removed within 24 hours after
the operation.
The use of antibiotics or drains was left to the
discretion of the surgeon. All operative procedures
were performed by the consultants or senior registrars who recorded the operative data.
Patients were followed up in the hospital and
after discharge at 6 weeks, 6 months and 1 year
postoperatively. Later on, they were requested to
contact the department if they had any complaints
or were admitted to the hospital for other reasons.
Routinely, on the third postoperative day a midstream urine sample was sent for microbiological
investigation. The obstetrician discharging the patient was responsible for the data collection including wound examination for dehiscence at 6 weeks
postoperatively and the ward nurses recorded postoperative observations. Both categories of staff
were unaware as to which study group the patients
had been allocated to.
Parity was defined as the number of previous
pregnancies >28 weeks. Gestational age was calculated from the first day of the last menstrual period
or by ultrasound scan. Duration of labor was from
the time of admission in labor until the operation
was performed. Prelabor rupture of the membranes was the clinical demonstration of ruptured
membranes before the onset of labor irrespective
of the gestational age. Febrile morbidity was defined as a temperature of greater than 38°C excluding the first two postoperative days. Endomyometritis was diagnosed if uterine tenderness and offensive lochia accompanied fever. The presence of
wound erythema, induration or purulent discharge
with or without fever indicated wound infection.
Urinary tract infection was diagnosed if the postoperative urine specimen contained more than
100,000 colonies of a single bacterial species per
milliliter of urine.
The data were analyzed using the Statistical
Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS Inc., Chicago, Ill.). S tudent-t test and Chi-square test were
used where appropriate with a p<0.05 considered
significant.
Results
Three hundred and sixty-one LSCS operations
were studied. Two hundred and one were primary
and 160 were repeat cesarean sections. The peritoneum was closed in 102 (50.7%) and 80 (50%) of
those operations respectively. Twelve primary (closure seven, non-closure five) and 16 repeat (closure
ten, non-closure six) operations included sterilization.
Table I describes the patient demographics including the number of primary and repeat cesarO Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 77 (1998)
Downloaded by [Australian Catholic University] at 12:27 15 August 2017 
1 12 H. S. Grundsell et al.
Table I. Patient demographics (n=361)
Closure of the Non-closure of the
peritoneum peritoneum
(n= 1 82) (n= 179) Significance
Age (years)
Parity
Duration of labor (hours)
Gestational age at operation (weeks)
Prelabor rupture of the membranes
Anesthesia
General
Epidural
Type of cesarean section
Primary
Repeat after one previous cesarean section
Repeat after two or more previous cesarean sections
Prophylactic antibiotics
Primary cesarean section
Repeat cesarean section
a Mean2s.d. Not significant. Values in parenthesis are percentage of the total number of patients in each group, n=182 in the closure group and 179 in the
non-closure group. pc0.05 in primary cesarean section compared to repeat cesarean section.
Table II. Operative and postoperative outcome in study patients
Closure of the Non-closure of the
peritoneum peritoneum
(n= 1 82) (n= 1 79) - Significance
Operating time (minutes)
Febrile morbidity
Endomyometritisb
Wound infectionb
Urinary tract infectionb
Fever of unknown origin
Wound dehiscence (6 weeks postoperatively)
Opening of bowels (days)
Admission days
lleus
a Mean5s.d. As defined in text. Values in parenthesis are percentage of the total number in each group, n=182 in the closure group and 179 in the nonclosure group. Not significant.
ean sections. As can be seen, the closure and nonclosure groups are comparable in the various parameters. The only statistically significant difference is a more frequent administration of prophylactic antibiotics for primary cesarean section
(pc0.05). This finding was expected because the
majority of the primary operations were performed as emergency LSCS while most of the repeat operations were elective procedures. Preterm
labor or rupture of the membranes were not common in either group. There is a relatively high parity for age of study patients. The frequency of epidural anesthesia for cesarean section is low in both
groups. The main indications for performing a primary cesarean section or a repeat cesarean section
after one previous operation were failure to progress in labor (57%) and fetal distress (43%). Almost 16% of patients with one previous cesarean
section had another operation. Patients who had
had two or more previous cesarean sections routinely underwent a repeat operation. Subfascial
drains were used in six of these patients (closure
four, non-closure two).
The study outcome is summarized in Table 11.
Postoperative febrile morbidity and wound infection are significantly decreased following non-closure compared to closure of the peritoneum. The
causes of the 49 cases (14%) of febrile morbidity
in this study were; endomyometritis - 18 cases,
urinary tract infection - 13 cases, fever of unknown origin - 10 cases and wound infection - eight cases. Five cases with urinary tract infection
(closure two, non-closure three) and three cases of
wound infection (closure two, non-closure one) did
O Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 77 (1998)
Downloaded by [Australian Catholic University] at 12:27 15 August 2017 
Peritoneal closure in cesarean section 1 1 3
not have febrile morbidity. None of the 57 women
who developed postoperative infection had been
diagnosed as having chorioamnionitis while in labor. The incidence of postoperative wound dehiscence, urinary tract infection and ileus and the
time of opening of the bowels postoperatively were
not significantly different after closure or non-closure of the peritoneum. However, there was a slight
tendency towards earlier opening of the bowels in
the non-closure group. In non-closure patients, the
operating time was 7.9 minutes shorter and the
hospital stay was one day less.
The estimated cost saving for each cesarean section when the visceral and parietal peritoneum are
not closed with sutures in our hospital is given in
Table 111. The total cost saving per operation
amounts to 330 US$ taking into account that the
calculated cost for anesthesia included only the use
of anesthetic drugs and for sutures was based on
the use of two 00 polyglactin sutures less.
Discussion
Closure of the peritoneum at LSCS has continued
in obstetrics, despite the lack of scientific benefits
of this procedure, merely because of empirical tradition and perpetuated training experience. Modern management of labor, awareness of the importance of aseptic techniques in surgery and advances in antibiotic therapy have minimized the
need to exclude the peritoneal cavity at cesarean
section (11). Closure of the fascial layers can be
made easier if the abdominal parieties are adequately relaxed during suturing of these layers
and if surgical principles of proper exposure, good
assistance and careful placement of fascial sutures
are employed without the need for parietal peritoneal closure (10). The belief that suturing the parietal peritoneum prevents postoperative hernia is
furthermore unfounded because the peritoneal
layer has minimal holding strength and contributes
little to the tensile strength of the abdominal
wound (5, 6, 12). In fact, when the parietal peritoTable Ill. Potential cost saving per one lower segment cesarean section if the
peritoneum is not closed
Cost item
Approximate
cost in US$
One admission day 285
Less 8 minutes anesthesia timea 40
Less 2 sutures of polyglactin 00 5
Total 330
a Including only the cost of anesthetic drugs.
neum and fascia were closed together in midline
incisions of beagle dogs, wound strength was decreased because preperitoneal fat interfered with
good apposition of the fascial edges (13). Suturing
the visceral peritoneum at transverse LSCS is also
unwarranted because vesico-uterine adhesions may
develop and this can cause bladder discomfort and
make subsequent pelvic surgery more difficult due
to adhesions (9).
Histological studies in animals have revealed
that the peritoneum regenerates de novo and not
from the cut edges of the defect as in skin wounds
because the entire surface becomes mesothelialized
simultaneously and not gradually from the wound
margins (4, 14-16). Tissue cultures suggest that
those new mesothelial cells are derived in situ from
the rnultipotent mesenchymal cells of the underlying granulation tissue. Large peritoneal defects,
therefore, heal as rapidly as small ones and peritoneal closure with sutures does not increase the rate
of peritoneal regeneration which is usually completed within 3-5 days.
The mechanism of postoperative intraperitoneal
adhesion formation still remains uncertain although probably related to tissue ischemia and necrosis, inflammatory reaction to suture materials
and infection (3, 4, 12, 14, 16, 17). Animal experiments have shown that re-establishing serosal integrity does not prevent the formation of adhesions and that suture materials cause foreign
body reaction and tissue necrosis with consequent
slowing of the healing process. In addition,
attempts to suture areas of peritoneal injury leads
to a paradoxical increase in adhesion formation at
the sites of repair by causing ischemia and subsequent failure of the local intrinsic peritoneal fibrinolytic system (12, 17). Suturing the peritoneum at cesarean section may thus actually increase the risk for postoperative adhesion
formation. Postoperative adhesions are an important factor in postoperative bowel obstruction,
chronic pelvic pain and infertility (10). A significant finding in our series, therefore, was the lack
of difference in the frequency of early or late postoperative complications of intra-abdominal adhesions i.e.subileus or ileus during 2-5 years of follow up (one in the closure group and none in the
non-closure group).
Postoperative laparoscopy to determine the extent of such adhesions would have been useful but
it was not possible to perform such procedures in
our series of patients for ethical and cultural reasons. However, Tulandi et d. (7) performed second
look laparoscopy in 333 patients who had undergone operations for tubal infertility one year previously (closure 168, non-closure 165) and could
show that non-closure of the parietal peritoneum
8 Acta Obstet GynecoI Scand 77 (1998)
Downloaded by [Australian Catholic University] at 12:27 15 August 2017 
1 14 H. S. Grundsell et al.
did not increase adhesion formation compared to
closure. In addition, in 163 cases of repeat LSCS,
Stark (8) found that the incidence of intra-abdominal adhesions at laparotoniy is significantly decreased when the visceral and parietal peritoneum
are not closed at the primary operation. Those
findings at least support the notion that, contrary
to classical belief, no clinically significant difference in adhesion formation between these two
techniques occur. In fact, non-closure of the peritoneum at LSCS might be better because women
undergoing this operation are usually young and
plan to have more children.
In this sample of abdominal deliveries, the incidence of early postoperative complications such as
wound hematoma, wound dehiscence, urinary
tract infection and return of bowel function was
similar in closure and lion-closure subjects. Similar
findings were noted in two smaller series of 113
patients (closure 54, non-closure 59) from Utah by
Hull and Varner (9) and of 115 patients (closure
59, non-closure 56) from Germany by Lange et al.
(18). Hull and Varney (9) observed that the nonclosure patients also required less narcotic analgesics for relief of postoperative pain while Lange
et al. (18), who studied non closure of only the
visceral peritoneum at LSCS, found that postoperative uterine involution took a shorter time in
this group. In a third study of 248 women in
Florida where non-closure of the parietal peritoneum was investigated in lower segment as well as
classical cesarean section (closure 12 1, non-closure
127), Pietrantoni et al. (10) reported similar results.
However, unlike the present study, the U.S. and the
German studies were limited to early postoperative
complications with an average follow up period of
6 weeks. We believe that our study is the first study
addressing the long term postoperative effects of
non-closure of both the visceral and parietal peritoneum in patients undergoing LSCS.
One important feature in our study is that nonclosure patients had a significantly lower incidence
of febrile morbidity. It is interesting that febrile
morbidity was also less frequent in non-closure patients in previous studies (9, 10, 18) despite differences in definition of puerpural febrile morbidity
and in patient demographic variables such as the
use of antibiotics and of drains, the incidence of
emergency cesarean section, the type of anesthesia
and the duration of labor. The incidence of postcesarean wound infection was also significantly
lower following non-closure of the peritoneum
compared to closure. Shorter operating time with
the former procedure (Table 11) is probably responsible because a direct relation between the
length of operation and wound infection rate has
previously been demonstrated (19). The dosage of
bacterial contamination increases with time and
wound cells may be damaged by drying and exposure thus reducing the local resistance of the
wound. It is also possible that leaving the peritoneal defects open for the debris to be digested by
the activity of peritoneal macrophages as well as
the general 'cleaning up' potential of the abdominal cavity might be beneficial.
The average operating time was 7.9 minutes
shorter and the average number of admission days
postoperatively was one day less in the non-closure
group. These figures compare favorably with an
average reduction in operating time of 5.1 and 7.9
minutes in the non-closure patients reported in
other studies (9, 10). A similar decrease in the
length of hospital stay postoperatively following
non-closure of the peritoneum was also observed
previously (18). Economic benefits amongst nonclosure subjects included shorter period of hospitalization, decreased anesthesia and less suture
costs (Table 111) and potential reduction in operating room expenditure as a result of less operating
time. With a better postoperative course and a
total cost saving amounting to 330 U.S.$ per cesarean section, non-closure of the peritoneum is
definitely a cost-effective procedure.
It now seems that obstetricians can delete suturing the visceral and parietal peritoneum at LSCS,
as originally described almost seventy years ago
(Kerr, 1926 - 1) because non-closure is a safe,
time-saving and cost effective operative technique.
More important, the procedure is simpler than closure of the peritoneum and is therefore ideal for
those parts of the world in which cesarean sections
have to be performed by personnel less qualified
than obstetricians, such as midwives. We thus conclude by a reiteration of Williams's (3) plea in 1955
'The view that peritonization is of vital importance
as a means of preventing adhesions on raw surfaces must be challenged. The peritoneum is not
an epithelial surface, it is not highly specialized, its
diverse potentialities depend upon its primitiveness. The rather rough manipulation that may
need to be carried out in order to peritonize an
area awkwardly placed may do far more harm
than any good that is intended, apart from the introduction of suture material, which, though often
necessary, is offensive to the tissues'.
Addendum
At the time of writing, Nagele et al. (20) reported
from Austria the world largest series containing
549 women (closure 287, non-closure of the visceral peritoneum 262) followed up for 6-24
months. Their findings support our opinion that
non-closure of the peritoneum in LSCS is at least
O Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 77 (1998)
Downloaded by [Australian Catholic University] at 12:27 15 August 2017 
Peritoneal closure iiz cesarean section 11 5
as safe as closure but is simpler to perform and is
associated with less cost.
Acknowledgment
We would like to thank Miss Gillian Perret for excellent secretarial assistance and registration of data in this study.
References
Kerr JMM. The technic of Cesarean section, with special
reference to the lower uterine segment incision. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1926; 12: 729-34.
Poole GV. Mechanical factors in abdominal wound closure:
The prevention of fascia1 dehiscence. Surg 1985; 97: 631-
40.
Williams DC. The peritoneum: A plea for a change in attitude towards the membrane. Br J Surg 1955; 42: 401-5.
Hubbard TB, Khan MZ, Carag VR, Alberts VE, Hricko
GM. The pathology of peritoneal repair: Its relation to the
formation of adhesions. Ann Surg 1967; 165: 909-16.
Ellis H, Heddle R. Does the peritoneum need to be closed
at laparotomy? Br J Surg 1977; 64: 733-6.
McFadden PM, Peacock EE. Preperitoneal abdominal
wound repair: Incidence of dehiscence. Am J Surg 1983;
145: 213-14.
Tulandi T, Hum HS, Gelfand MM. Closure of laparotomy
incisions with or without peritoneal suturing and secondlook laparoscopy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1988; 158: 536-7.
Stark M. Clinical evidence that suturing the peritoneum
after laparotomy is unnecessary for healing. World J Surg
1993; 17: 419.
Hull DB, Varner MW. A randomized study of closure of
the peritoneum at cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 199 1;
77: 81 8-20.
Pietrantoni M, Parsons MT, O'Brien MF, Collins E, Knuppel RA, Spellacy WN. Peritoneal closure or non-closure at
cesarean. Obstet Gynecol 1991; 77: 293-5.
11. Garbert HA, Bey M. History and development of Cesarean
operation. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 1988; 15: 591-
605.
12. Kapur BML, Daneswar A, Chopra I? Evaluation of peritoneal closure at laparotomy. Am J Surg 1979; 137: 650-2.
13. Karipineni RC, Wilk PJ, Danese CA. The role of the peritoneum in the healing of abdominal incisions. Surg Gynec01 Obstet 1976; 142: 729-30.
Ellis H. The aetiology of post-operative abdominal adhesions: An experimental study. Br J Surg 1962; 50: 10-16.
Ellis H, Harrison W, Hugh TB. The healing of peritoneum
under normal and pathological conditions. Br J Surg 1965;
52: 471-6.
Elkins TE, Stovall TG, Warren J, Ling FW, Meyer NL. A
histologic evaluation of peritoneal injury and repair: Implications for adhesion formation. Obstet Gynecol 1987; 70:
225-8.
Buckman RF, Maj MC, Buckman PD, Hufnagel HV, Gervin AS. A physiologic basis for adhesion-free healing of deperitonealized surfaces. J Surg Res 1976; 21: 67-76.
Lange M, Schmidt J, Tatschl S, Denison U, Salzer H. Is
internal peritonialization after cesarean section necessary?
Results of a randomized study. Gynakol Geburtshilfliche
Rundsch 1993; 339 (Suppl 1): 264.
Curse P. Wound infection surveillance. Rev Infect Dis 198 1;
3: 734-7.
Nagele F, Karas H, Spitzer D et al. Closure or nonclosure
of the visceral peritoneum at cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 1996; 174: 1366-70.
Address for correspondence:
Diaa E. E. Rizk, M.D.
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences
United Arab Emirates University
PO. Box 17666, Al-Ain
United Arab Emirates
O Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 77 (1998)
Downloaded by [Australian Catholic University] at 12:27 15 August 2017 