Abstract :
Objectives: To assess the short term morbidity of non-closure of the visceral and parietal peritoneal at caesarean section as
compared to suture peritonization. Methods: A prospective randomized controlled trial of 200 women undergoing cesarean
section was done; randomized into non-closure and closure groups. Perioperative, intraoperative and postoperative details
were recorded in the proforma. Chi-square/student t-test were used to compared outcome between the two groups. Results:
Operating time, anesthesia time and time of ambulation were significantly shorter in non-closure group (p<0.0001). There was
less postoperative pain, analgesic requirement and febrile morbidity in non-closure group; however it was not statistically
significant. Conclusion: Avoiding the closure of visceral and parietal peritoneum at cesarean is associated with lesser operating
time, decreased febrile morbidity and lesser need for postoperative analgesics. Hence routine closure of peritoneum at cesarean
can be avoided.
Keywords: peritoneal closure, cesarean section, postoperative morbidity
Introduction
Cesarean section is most certainly one of the oldest
operations in surgery, with its origin lost in antiquity
and in ancient mythology. Over the years, there is little
information relating to the optimum operative technique
for this method of delivery1
. Traditionally, suturing of
the visceral and parietal peritoneum at cesarean section
has been widely accepted, despite the lack of evidence
establishing its benefits. Apart from aesthetic
consideration, there is a belief that closure of peritoneum
can prevent adhesions2
. On the contrary, theoretical
consideration and animal experiments support the
opposite view3
. Suture peritonization tends to cause
ischemia, necrosis, inflammation and foreign body
reactions to the suture material. On the other hand,
clean incision of the peritoneal surface without suturing
the cut edges provides more rapid peritoneal repair,
leading to less postoperative pain, fever, lesser risk of
ileus and better wound healing4-6.
The present study aims to assess the short-term
morbidity, to evaluate whether non-closure of the
visceral and parietal peritoneum has benefits over
routine closure, with regards to the intraoperative and
early postoperative course.
Methodology
It was a prospective randomized controlled study to
determine the short term clinical outcome of non-closure
48
in comparison with closure of visceral and parietal
peritoneum at cesarean delivery. It was carried out in
the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Mahadevappa Rampure Medical College, Gulbarga,
from June 2003 to May 2005.
Two hundred women undergoing emergency or elective
lower segment cesarean section were recruited for the
study. Exclusion criteria were history of previous lower
abdominal surgery, severe anemia, presence of pelvic
infection and adhesions, morbid obesity and foul
smelling vaginal discharge.
After detailed history, examination and investigations,
informed written consent was obtained from each patient
for participation in the study. By using computer
generated random numbers, with the use of opaque
sealed envelopes, the women were randomly allocated
to one of the two groups, closure (control) or nonclosure (subject) group. The envelopes were opened in
sequence in the operating theatre, just before the start
of the surgery and note shown to the surgeon. On call
consultants or third year postgraduate students
supervised by consultants performed all operative
procedures.
All the women underwent lower segment cesarean
section through a pfannenstiel incision. Uterus was
closed with continuous number 1 polyglactin. In the
control group, both the layers of peritoneum were
sutured with continuous 1-0 chromic catgut. Rectus
sheath was closed with a continuous number 1 prolene.
The skin was approximated with continuous
subcuticular number 2-0 polyglactin. Subject group had
similar procedure of cesarean section but without
reapproximation of visceral and parietal peritoneum.
Injection Amoxicillin and clavulanic acid 1.2g single
dose was given preoperatively, by intravenous route
in elective cases, whereas in the emergency group,
intravenous injection Ampicillint Cloxacillin 500mg 8th
hourly, injection metromidazole 400mg 8th hourly and
injection Garramycin 80mg 12th hourly were given on
the first two days of surgery and oral antibiotics for the
next three days.
After the operation, all patients were managed in the
same postoperative ward. The consultants and
postgraduate students who did not perform the surgery
were blinded to the study and made all postoperative
assessment and management. In the absence of
Table 1.
Patient characteristics, type of anesthesia and cesarean
Non-closure Closure Statistical
n=100 n=100 significance
Age (Years) 24.5±4.4 23.7±3.7 t=1.3,p=0.2
Mean+SD Not significant
Parity 0.6±1.1 0.5±1.1 t=0.4,p=0.6
Mean+SD Not significant
Gestational age 37.5±2.3 37.6±2.0 t=0.3,p=0.6
Mean+SD Not significant
Anaesthesia
General 19 20 X2
=0.4, p=0.5
Spinal 81 80 Not significant
Elective 13 9 X2
=0.1, p=0.8
Emergency 87 89 Not significant
p=p value; t-student t test