88 BRITISH DENTAL JOURNAL VOLUME 190. NO.2 JANUARY 27 2001
that they, on average, sustain 3 injuries a year and 32–33 % of them
are related to needles.2 In Scotland a survey showed that non-sterile
inoculation injuries occurred at a yearly rate of 1.7 (SD=3.2) and of
these 30% constituted a moderate or high risk of transmission of
infection to the dentist.3
It is well known that needle stick injuries can result in transmission of blood borne viruses, including HIV, hepatitis B and C. A survey of occupational injuries in a London teaching hospital in 1994
showed that 7% of exposures involving blood or body fluids were
positive for at least one blood borne virus.4 A survey in a Californian dental school showed that 17% of source patients were HIV positive.5 Staff who have acquired a needle stick injury from a patient at
high risk of, or known to be, HIV positive face at least a three month
period of uncertainty about their status which can lead to considerable anxiety and distress.6 If following Department of Health
recommendations on post exposure prophylaxis they take antiretroviral therapy they are also highly likely to suffer unpleasant
toxic side effects which affects compliance.7 Although protection
against hepatitis B is available there is, as yet, no vaccine against
hepatitis C, whose prevalence in the UK in 1997 was estimated at 2.3
per 1000.8 It is, therefore, imperative for all staff to ensure that the
risk of acquiring a needle stick injury is reduced to a minimum. It is
for this reason that UK hospital infection control policies clearly
state ‘Handle all sharps carefully, never re-sheath needles, all sharps
and needles should be disposed of directly into sharps bins’. The
Centre for Disease Control (CDC) guidelines in the US also state
that needles should not be recapped but do add that in instances
where non disposable syringes are used then a one handed ‘scoop’
technique or mechanical device should be used.9 Until the last few
years, there were no suitable disposable dental syringes available to
dentists as is borne out by this statement in a textbook on infection
control published in 1995 ‘dentistry has no disposable anesthetic
syringe and there is no feasible alternative to recapping’.10 Manufacturers have been aware of this problem for a long time and there are
now several different types of safety syringe on the market. It is,
therefore, time for dental schools and practices to reconsider their
practice concerning syringes. This involves a major change in any
clinical practice and needs to be considered with care. How change
can be achieved in clinical practice has become the focus of many
articles as it is essential that guidelines and research findings are
quickly incorporated into clinical practice. Grol has emphasized in
his review on beliefs and evidence in changing practice that several
different methods may need to be used in order to effect a change.11
It is with all these factors in mind that one dental school comprising some 300 staff (undergraduate, postgraduate students, qualified
dentists, dental nurses, hygienists and therapists) decided to make
the change over to safety syringes.
This paper aims to describe how an appropriate syringe was chosen, how the change- over to safety syringes was achieved and what
outcome measures were used to measure the effectiveness of this
change.
RESEARCH
cross-infection control
Introducing safety syringes into a UK
dental school — a controlled study
J. M. Zakrzewska,1,2 I. Greenwood,1 and J. Jackson,3
Aim How an appropriate safety syringe was chosen, how the
change-over to it was achieved and what outcome measures were
used to measure the effectiveness of this change.
Introduction One third of all reported sharps injuries in dental
practice are due to the use of non disposable dental syringes with
most injuries being sustained during removal and disposal of the
disposable needle from the non-disposable syringe.
Method After evaluation of all available disposable safety
syringes they were introduced into a dental school after
appropriate education of all staff and students. Risk management
provided data on all reported needle-stick injuries in the dental
school and a control unit using non disposable syringes for a
period of two years.
Results Avoidable needle stick injuries reduced from an average
of 11.8 to 0 injuries per 1,000,000 hours worked per year as
compared to a control unit who reduced their frequency from 26
to 20 injuries per 1,000,000 hours worked. The cost of safety
syringes is comparable to non-disposable syringes but the
reduction in cost of management of needle stick injuries
including the psychological effects are significant.
Conclusion Education plays a vitally important role in the
effective implementation of the change to safety syringes which is
advocated for all dentists.
The dental metallic cartridge syringe was introduced into dentistry in 1921 and an aspirating plunger was added 36 years
later. Since then few modifications have taken place and the dental
syringe is such a part of the everyday life of dental practice that all
too often it is taken completely for granted. One would hope that
there is not a single practice in the United Kingdom that uses nondisposable needles, yet most practices continue to use non-disposable syringes. The use of non-disposable syringes means that
needles must be re-sheathed in order for the syringes to be dismantled and the appropriate parts autoclaved. It is during re-sheathing
and disposal of the needles that the majority of needle stick injuries
occur, especially when done frequently in an environment with
trainees and students.1 The injuries occur at a time when the
syringes are most likely to be contaminated, having been in the
patient’s mouth. Surveys carried out among US dentists showed
1,2 Oral Medicine Department, St. Bartholomew’s and The Royal LondonSchool
of Medicine and Dentistry, Turner Street, London, E1 2AD 2Mortimer Market
Centre Dental Clinic, Mortimer Market, London, WC1E 6AU 3Dental Auxiliary
School St. Bartholomew’s and The Royal LondonSchool of Medicine and
DentistryTurner Street, London, E1 2AD
*Correspondence to: J. M. Zakrzewska
E-mail: j.m.zak@mds.qmw.ac.uk
REFEREED PAPER
Received 20.10.00; Accepted 05.12.00
© British Dental Journal 2001; 190: 88–92
BRITISH DENTAL JOURNAL VOLUME 190. NO.2 JANUARY 27 2001 89
Method
The stages used in achieving a change over from non-disposable to
disposable (safety ) syringes are described below.
1 Collecting the evidence for the need for a change in practice and setting the outcome measures. A dedicated clinic dealing exclusively
with patients with blood borne viruses (predominately HIV) had,
over a number of years reported several needle stick injuries due
to the use of non-disposable syringes. The psychological trauma
associated with these injuries was considerable and the clinic
members changed to safety syringes as soon as a suitable one was
launched on the UK market. A review of the reported incidence of
needle stick injuries among staff at a dental school also showed
that the dental school was at high risk of sustaining needle stick
injuries. The majority of reported needle stick injuries had been
sustained during resheathing and dismantling of the syringes or
while the needle was lying uncovered in an operating area. These
were considered avoidable injuries as they could be prevented by
the use of appropriate safety syringes. It was, therefore, clear that
the main outcome measure to be used to assess the value of the
change over to safety syringes would be that of reduction in the
number of avoidable needle stick injuries attributable to the use
of the syringes. It would not be possible to reduce those injuries
sustained due to patient or operator unexpected movements.
Data on injuries for the previous 3 years and then for 2 years after
introduction of the safety syringes was collected from risk management. Apart from the investigators, staff were not aware that
this monitoring was being carried out. Staff numbers for each
year were collected and an estimate made of the number of hours
worked. Secondary outcome data on costs of the syringe and the
management of needle stick injuries were obtained from Central
Sterile Supplies Department (CSSD), Supplies Department and
Occupational Medicine.
2 Testing of the product. Two qualified dentists in the dedicated
clinic contacted manufacturers of syringes and eventually found
four different types of safety syringes. They evaluated them on
trial for a month, although two models used 1.8 ml cartridges
rather than the standard UK size of 2.2 ml and so were not considered of use in the UK. In their evaluation they used the basic
criteria as laid down by the American Dental Association Council
on Dental Materials12 and others as described by Malamed.13 The
results of the evaluations are shown in table 1. The four syringes
are pictured in figure 1 and clearly illustrate the component parts
that are disposable and those that need to be autoclaved. The
handle of the Septodont Safety Plus syringe does not require
autoclaving unless it has been contaminated with blood and
saliva but it should be disinfected by immersal in hypochlorite
solution of appropriate strength and for sufficient time as used
for other dental items such as shade guides. Details on how to
assemble the Ultrasafe and Septodont Safety plus systems can be
found in Malamed’s Handbook on Local Anesthesia.13 Further
talks with manufacturers resulted in improved designs and finally
one product was chosen and adopted as the syringe of choice in
the dedicated clinic.
3 Choosing a moment for introducing the change within the dental
school. Due to major changes in the way that instruments were to
be sterilized in the future a dental school was having to order extra
equipment to cope with the increased turnover time of instruments. Clinicians were being asked to choose a new syringe and
this was used as a moment to introduce the new safety syringes as
money had been identified for the purchase of new syringes.
4 Convincing key players of the need for change. One of the authors
who worked at the dedicated clinic also worked at a UK dental
school and had been convinced of the success of the new safety
syringes in the dedicated clinic. She was prepared to introduce
them into the teaching hospital. The data on needle stick injuries,
samples of the product and cost analysis were all used to introduce the concept of a safety syringe to key clinicians in the
restorative dentistry department, service managers, clinical directors and nursing staff.
5 Ensuring adequate supplies and means of disposal. Negotiations
were entered into with the chosen supplier in order to ensure that
adequate supplies would be available to allow the whole school to
change at the same time. In view of the increased bulk of the safety
syringes new waste disposal bins had to be ordered and distributed round the clinics. On the other hand waste paper used by
CSSD to wrap up the non disposable syringes was reduced.
RESEARCH
cross-infection control
Table 1: Comparison of 1 non disposable and 3 safety syringes to the gold standard
Gold standard Standard non-disposable USA Hyposafety US ultrasafe Kavo disposable Safety plus
Quickly assembled No Yes ++ Yes ++ No Yes ++
Needle attached already No Yes Yes No Yes
Variety of needles available Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Accept variety of cartridge sizes Yes No No No Yes
Suitable size for all operators Mixed types Very small size Small size Small size Small size
Light weight No Lightweight ++ Lightweight ++ Lightweight + Depends on handle
Variable handles depending on preference Thumb ring and T shaped Thumb ring Thumb ring T shaped Plastic thumb ring, metal
T-shaped, interligamentary
Cartridge visible through syringe Yes Not clear Yes Not clear Not clear
Wide sheath to protect needle
when syringe not in use No No Yes Yes Yes
Provide effective aspiration Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Able to put in another cartridge if necessary Yes Yes No Yes Yes
Complete unit disposable No, syringe left Yes Yes No, syringe left No , handle left
Cartridge disposed with needle No Yes Yes No Yes
Quick to dispose No Yes ++ Yes++ No Yes +
Easy to dispose No Yes Yes No Yes
Autoclaving essential Yes No No Yes No
Little training required Need ++ Little Little Need+++ Need +
Cheap ++ + + + ++
Risk of injury when used High Low Very low Low Very low
Fig. 1 Examples of the four safety syringes currently on the market.
Number one is Safety plus, number 2 is USA hyposafety, number 3 is
Kavo disposable and number 4 is USA ultrasafe. Their characteristics
are discussed in table 1. All items below the line are disposable.
90 BRITISH DENTAL JOURNAL VOLUME 190. NO.2 JANUARY 27 2001
Storage areas for the syringes were also identified.
6 Setting up a clear protocol for changeover. All key staff involved in
the change over were aware of the need for high attendance at
training sessions and the date of introduction of the new syringes
which was widely publicised.
7 Training of staff. Over a period of two weeks multiple training sessions were organised with the manufacturers’ personnel coming
in to ensure that the technique was carefully explained, demonstrated and tested. All grades of staff were included as well as all
the dental students and trainee nurses. Dental students were not
allowed to use the new system until they had been signed up as
attending the sessions.
8 Ensuring smooth change over after training. Once the staff had
undergone training the new syringes were introduced throughout the dental school. The CSSD department was alerted to the
need to sterilise the handles and to replace them after a hundred
cycles. Representatives from the manufacturers then attended at
regular intervals to pick up on any problems and to institute
changes if possible. Training videos were made and given to the
school to ensure further training of new staff after a temporary
new member of staff sustained an injury due to lack of training.
All new junior dental staff are introduced to the new syringes during their induction period.
9 Follow up. Careful monitoring has continued and all staff are
encouraged to highlight any problems that are encountered.
Close contact is maintained with the manufactures so that any
modifications can be made if necessary. Preliminary use of the
syringes, especially among dental students, showed that the internal diameter of the needle was too small as increased pressure on
the handle resulted in bending of the needle. Consequently the
needles were re-designed and their internal diameter enlarged
without any outside increase in diameter. Less pressure is now
applied while injecting resulting in fewer bent needles, more flexibility and decreased discomfort to the patient. Dental students
knowledge is tested formally during their in-course assessment
when they are observed preparing a syringe for use and then disposing of it.
A busy surgical unit was used as a control. Although they had
undergone training they considered that there was insufficient evidence to prove that the injuries occurring during disposal could be
reduced by the use of safety syringes. Increased awareness of safety
issues was considered sufficient.
Results
Of the four safety syringes the Septodont Safety Plus system was
chosen as it fulfilled most of the requirements and this is illustrated
in figure 1, syringe 1.
Table 2 shows that the majority of sharps injuries in the dental
school are due to the use of syringes and that most could have been
avoided with the use of a safety syringe. More injuries are sustained
by trainees and students than qualified staff. The main outcome
measure showed that a reduction in avoidable needle stick injuries
had been achieved. In the dental school the frequency of avoidable
needle stick injuries fell from a pre-change average of 11.8 to 0 per
1,000,000 hours worked per year in the second year of use of the
safety syringes. Some reduction was noted in the surgical unit as
shown in figure 2 but this was not as marked and was the same over
the two years. Incidence of avoidable needle stick injuries per 1,000
RESEARCH
cross-infection control
Table 2 Number of sharps injuries sustained in the dental school and a control unit 3 years prior (years 1–3) and 2 years (years 4–5) post
introduction of safety syringes
Injury Year 1 Year 1 Year 2 Year2 Year 3 Year3 Year4 Year 4 Year 5 Year 5
Qualified Trainee Qualified Trainee Qualified Trainee Qualified Trainee Qualified Trainee
School using safety syringe
Number of staff at risk 68 173 68 170 68 186 68 176 68 176
Total number of sharps injuries 5 11 5 8 4 9 4 3 4 1
Number relating to syringes 2 5 1 4 2 4 2 2 0 0
Number avoidable injuries 1 5 1 3 2 3 2 1 0 0
Unit using metal syringe
Number of staff at risk 39 20 39 20 39 20 39 20 39 20
Total number of sharps injuries 4 3 3 1 2 2 4 1 2 0
Number relating to syringes 3 1 2 1 1 2 4 0 2 0
Number avoidable injuries 2 1 1 1 1 2 2* 0 1+1* 0
Trainee=dental student, student dental nurse or student therapist/hygienist
Avoidable=any injury that relates to removal and disposal of needle or its protection when not in use that would not occur when using the ideal safety syringe,
* near misses reported by CSSD.ie: unsheathed needles on syringes.
It is assumed that staff work a 37.5 hour week and work for 46 weeks a year. The estimated number of probable syringe contacts per week in the school is 1640 whereas for the unit
using the metal syringes it is 270.
BRITISH DENTAL JOURNAL VOLUME 190. NO.2 JANUARY 27 2001 91
employees also fell in the dental school, from an average of 20.5 to 0
in the second year, whereas in the surgical unit it remained the same
— an average of 45.2 per 1,000 employees in the three years prior to
introduction to 33.9 per 1,000 in the two years after the introduction. Due to the small numbers of injuries the change-over has not
resulted in a statistically significant change but there is a definite
trend. In the dental school there is an estimated 1640 needle contacts a week whereas in the surgical unit it is 270 per week.
Post introduction of the safety syringes four injuries were sustained in the dental school in the first six months. Three of these
were avoidable and had been recorded on the accident form to be
related to lack of training. The personnel involved were a temporary
nurse, a trainee nurse and a qualified dental nurse. The other injury
occurred due to movement of the patient during an injection. In the
surgical unit still using metal non disposable syringes two injuries
were due to patient movement. The other reports were of ‘near
misses’ in which 3 workers in CSSD found used unsheathed needles
still attached to the dental syringes when being returned for autoclaving. The needles had been bent so badly that they would have
been impossible to re-sheath using the narrow sheaths available
with those needles.
The current cost of a 100 safety needles and syringes and one handle in the dental school is £5.95, extra handles cost £1.25 each. Needles used for non disposable syringes cost £6.06 per hundred and a
non-disposable syringe costs £15 and needs replacing every two
years. Sterilization costs 20p per item. The cost of a safety syringe is
therefore around 18p whereas a non disposable syringe costs
around 25.8p.
The following estimates on managing a recipient such as an E
grade nurse were based on the cost of managing needle stick injuries
in cases were the source patient is HIV negative (requires no intervention) or HIV positive (when staff may or may not elect for post
exposure prophylaxis). The costs include administrative and staff
costs, 30 minute consultation and blood tests.
• A needle stick injury, no drugs and no starter pack: £136.04
• A needle stick injury, starter pack no further drug course:
£296.89
• A needle stick injury, full drugs course, no sickness absence:
£2,151.70
• A needle stick starter pack, full drugs course, sickness absence:
£3,845.31
• Extra three one hour counselling sessions if requested: £96
In the data obtained from risk management one of the source
patients was HIV positive but due to confidentiality it was not possible to ascertain whether the recipient took post exposure prophylaxis. In the Trust to which the dental school belongs it was
estimated that 1 in 119 incidents are reported to the Communicable
Diseases Surveillance Centre. Under-reporting is common but difficult to estimate as recipients have a variety of routes by which to seek
support and maintenance of confidentiality is a high priority in
order to encourage reporting.
Close contact with the manufacturers has led to continual
improvement in the design of the safety syringe which has improved
their acceptance among the dental staff. The barrels are now tighter
and the wider bore needles are a marked improvement. Needles are
more flexible and less likely to become blocked and do not appear to
result in breakage given their thinner walls. Work is continuing to
make the plastic clearer so that it is easier to detect blood when aspirating and to improve aspiration. It has been found that on average
it takes staff one month to completely familiarize themselves with
the new system. Although the syringes take just as long to put
together, their disposal is markedly faster and safer. Continued education is essential and a dental infection control nurse has been designated to ensuring that all new staff including students are trained
in the correct use of the safety syringes.
Discussion
It is possible for a dental school to change to safety syringes provided key issues are addressed and it does result in a reduction in the
number of avoidable needle stick injuries.
It was acknowledged from the outset that effecting a change to a
lighter, plastic, safety syringe was nearly equivalent to the change of
routine wearing of gloves during dental procedures. The benefits of
glove wearing are now well recognised and we have shown that a
reduction in number of avoidable needle stick injuries can be
achieved by changing to safety syringes provided sufficient training
has been given. The benefit may not be as marked in general dental
practice where the number of avoidable needle stick injuries may be
smaller.
It needs to be remembered that underreporting of needle stick
injuries is commonplace and has been reported to be as high as 26%
in a California Teaching Hospital.5 The number of reported injuries
is relatively small but these are some of the highest figures for a clinical directorate in this Trust and show that the majority of sharps
injuries occur while dismantling the syringes.
The reduction in injuries could have been due to raised staff
awareness as a result of the intense training and highlighting of needle stick injuries and not due to the new safety syringes as shown by
the reduction in year 2 prior to introduction and by the surgical
units figures. However analysis of the timing of the injuries after
introduction of safety syringes shows that all the injuries reported
after the change-over occurred in the first six months of the change
over and in the last 18 months no injuries were reported. The avoidable needle stick rate is reduced and sustained. This would support
RESEARCH
cross-infection control
Fig. 2 Frequency of reported avoidable needle stick injuries three
years prior to the use of safety syringes and 2 years after their
introduction in a dental school. Frequency is defined as the frequency
per 1,000,000 hours worked based on a 37.5 hour week and 46 week
year.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
School using
safety syringes
Unit using
metal syringes
Frequency per 1,000,000 hours worked
14
8
11
7
0
29
20
29
20 20
92 BRITISH DENTAL JOURNAL VOLUME 190. NO.2 JANUARY 27 2001
the conclusion that the new safety syringes contributed significantly
to these reductions but that increased awareness is also important.
This study in common with others showed that it is the unqualified staff that are at highest risk of injury.5 This is of special
importance in dental schools where staff are training and are
therefore more vulnerable to injuries.1 Education needs to be
continued as Gyawali et al. have stressed in their review of
injuries.4 This is especially important currently, as new staff joining the school may not have used this system in the previous
workplace. One of our reported injuries was sustained by a temporary member of staff. To ensure that all dental students attend
training sessions they are formally tested on their ability to use
the new syringes during their in-course assessments. No dental
student has sustained an avoidable needle stick injury since the
introduction of the safety syringe. New dental students are now
being taught how to use the product within the first few weeks of
starting their dental course and none have sustained any injury
whilst practising which was commonplace previously. Staff did
find that it took some time to get used to the new syringes and it is
important to acknowledge this in order to stop them going back
to their old practices. Malamed also acknowledges the ease with
which these systems are learned and of the importance of using
them. He states that ‘a safety syringe system is strongly recommended.’13
In our study the dental nurse trainees were most frequently
involved in needle stick injuries. This was surprising given the local
policy that the dentist is responsible for clearing the area of all
sharps before handing over to the nurses. This study has highlighted
this deficient practice and it is an area of education that is now being
addressed.
It has also been argued that when dental students move out into
general dental practice they will be unfamiliar with non-disposable
syringes and could, therefore, be at increased risk of sustaining needle stick injuries. It is the contention of the authors that dental students, once qualified, and joining a practice should feel sufficiently
confident with the use of safety syringes that they will ask their colleagues to change to the new system rather than adapt to outdated
practices. The need to effect a change over to safety syringes and to
increase awareness of needle stick injuries is further highlighted by a
recent report from the Dental Protection Society which quotes the
case of a nurse who sustained a needle stick injury while attempting
to re-sheath a needle.14 It was noted that she had neither received
instruction about infection control nor had she been provided with
any type of re-sheathing device. The nurse was successful in her
claim alleging severe anxiety and depression following the needle
stick injury. Employers could be liable if their employees attempt to
sue them for exposing them to products that have a higher risk for
needle stick injury when safer equipment is now readily available.
The State of California has introduced legislation that requires all
health care employers to provide sharps safety devices which in the
field of dentistry is interpreted as a ‘safety needle with engineered
built-in safety mechanisms’.15 Other States have introduced bills
with similar regulations. Concern, however, has been expressed that
the safety and efficacy of the current devices has not been verified.
This study provides evidence that a change to safety needles does
result in a substantial change in the number of needle stick injuries
in a dental school especially if combined with increased awareness.
The price of the new safety syringes has fallen considerably and
there is little cost difference between the two systems. The cost of a
needle stick injury is not insignificant even if no treatment is
required. Not only are there physical costs but the psychological
effects are considerable.6 Two of the authors have had considerable
experience in dealing with the short and long term effects that staff
suffer after sustaining needle stick injuries from patients with HIV
and these must not be underestimated. Any reduction in needle
stick is therefore psychologically significant. Counselling is often
needed for recipients of injuries even if the source patient was not at
risk of a blood borne virus. It must also be remembered that some
staff do not have an adequate response to Hepatitis B vaccination
and that no vaccination is available for Hepatitis C. These two conditions also cause considerable morbidity and mortality.
Working closely with the manufacturers will enable changes to
the design to be introduced so improving the product even further.
Occupational blood exposures have been steadily falling and this
figure can be further improved by the introduction of safety
syringes not only into dental schools but also in the community
dental services and general dental practice.16
We are grateful to: the risk management team at Barts and the Royal London NHS
Trust who provided the relevant data, Dr D.Samarawickrama for first introducing
the new syringes into his department, Dr E. Davenport for organising the student
assessment, Dr D. D’Auria for cost data and help with analysis, Ms Turner for
statistical advice and all the dental healthcare workers who took part in the study.
We are indebted to Septodont for their supplies, training and help.
1 McDonald R I, Walsh L J, Savage N W. Analysis of workplace injuries in
a dental school environment. Aust.Dent.J. 1997;42:109-113.
2 Siew C, Gruninger S E, Miaw C L, Neidle E A. Percutaneous injuries in
practicing dentists. A prospective study using a 20-day diary. J Am Dent.
Assoc 1995;126:1227-1234.
3 Gore S M, Felix D H, Bird A G, Wray D. Occupational risk and precautions related to HIV infection among dentists in the Lothian region of
Scotland. J Infect 1994;28:209-222.
4 Gyawali P, Rice P S, Tilzey A J. Exposure to blood borne viruses and the
hepatitis B vaccination status among healthcare workers in inner
London. Occup Environ Med 1998;55 :570-572.
5 Ramos-Gomez F, Ellison J, Greenspan D, Bird W, Lowe S, Gerberding J
L. Accidental exposures to blood and body fluids among health care
workers in dental teaching clinics: a prospective study. J Am Dent.Assoc
1997;128:1253-1261.
6 David H T, David Y M. Living with needlestick injuries. J Can Dent Assoc
1997;63:283-286.
7 Parkin J M, Murphy M, Anderson J, El-Gadi S, Forster G, Pinching A J.
Tolerability and side effects of post-exposure prophylaxis for HIV infection. Lancet 2000;355:722-723.
8 Neal K R, Dornan J, Irving W L. Prevalence of hepatitis C antibodies
among healthcare workers of two teaching hospitals. Who is at risk? BMJ
1997;314:179-180.
9 Anonymous. Recommended infection-control practices for dentistry,
1993. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep. 1993;42:1-12.
10 Cottone J A, Terezhalmy G T, Molinani J A. Practical Infection Control in
Dentistry. USA: Williams and Wilkins, 1995:
11 Grol R. Personal paper. Beliefs and evidence in changing clinical practice.
BMJ 1997;315:418-421.
12 Council on Dental Materials and Devices. New American National
Standards Institute/American Dental Association Specification No 34 for
Dental Aspirating Syringes. J Am Dent Assoc 1978;236-238.
13 Malamed S F. Handbook of local anesthesia. USA: Mosby, 1997:
14 Anonymous. Dental Protection Annual Report. Building confidence in
dental practice. Medical Protection Society. 13. 1999. London.
15 Cuny E J, Fredekind R, Budenz A W. Safety needles. New requirements
of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration bloodborne
pathogens rule. J Calif Dent Assoc 1999;26:525-530.
16 Cleveland J L, Gooch B F, Lockwood S A. Occupational blood exposures
in dentistry: a decade in review. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1997;18:717-721.
RESEARCH
cross-infection control
Appendix
Manufacturers of syringes discussed in table 3 and illustrated
 in figure 1
1 Ultrasafe Safety Syringes Inc 250 W. Coloroado Blvd.
 Suite 101 Arcadia CA 91007
2 Hyposafety cartridge Syringe MPL Technologies Inc
 A SoloPak Company Franklin Park, IL 60131-2116
3 Kavo disposable syringe Kavo Dental Ltd 77 Gloucester Rd
 Patchway Bristol BS34 5JQ
4 Safety Plus Septodont Deproco UK Ltd, Units R and S,
 Orchard Business Centre, St Barnabas Close, Allington,
 Maidstone, Kent, ME16 OJZ