BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: The purpose of REACH II is to assess
hospitals’ respiratory protection programs (RPPs) and healthcare
workers’ use of respiratory protection. The study focuses on
adherence to OSHA standards and CDC recommendations, which
address employee medical evaluations, fit testing and training; the
proper selection, use, maintenance, and inspection of respirators;
and regular program evaluation and risk assessments.
METHODS: Data were collected during 2011-2012 in 98 acute
care hospitals in five regions across the country (North Carolina,
Minnesota/Illinois, New York, Michigan, and California). Onsite
surveys were conducted with hospital managers (HMs), unit
managers (UMs), and health care workers (HCWs). The 1500
survey participants, drawn from convenience samples, represented a variety of clinical specialties. Interviewers also observed
respirator use demonstrations by 300 HCWs. Descriptive statistics, cross-tabulations, and multinomial logistic modeling are
used to assess the research questions. For the one-way and twoway tables, adherence to standards and recommendations is
based on hospital-level calculated values. For the multinomial
models, individual-level adherence values are used. Independent
variables include hospital size, geographic area, union membership, employment status, and whether the HCW received an
influenza vaccination.
RESULTS: All participating hospitals had an RPP and adhere to fit
testing standards, but there are notable differences in opinions
about how the RPP works across respondent groups and states.
HCWs are often unaware of which type of respiratory protection is
required for infection diseases. Among HCWs, there are regional
differences regarding which respiratory protection to use under
various circumstances and proper respirator donning and doffing
procedures. Specifically, HCWs appear unclear about when to use
respiratory protection, what type should be used, and how to
properly donn and doff respirators. Significant regional differences
in HM and UM opinions exist regarding aspects of program evaluation, risk assessment procedures, employee training.
CONCLUSIONS: Significant gaps in knowledge exist among HCW
regarding many aspects of recommended and required respirator
use. There are also gaps in knowledge among HM and UMs,
particularly about protection with regards to season flu, medical
reevaluations, program evaluation, risk assessment, and respirator
maintenance. Results cannot be generalized to other hospitals and/
or regions. Suggested implications for improved RPPS and healthcare worker practices based on the findings will be discussed.
Presentation Number 8-349
Reducing Needlestick Injuries from Active Safety
Devices: A Passive Safety-Engineered Device Trial
Ashleigh J. Goris RN, BSN, MPH, CIC, Infection Prevention
Consultant, BJC HealthCare - Saint Louis, Missouri; Jerry Glotzer
MS, CHEC, Director, Regulatory Compliance, Environmental Health
& Safey, Occupational Health and Workers Compensation, Barnes
Jewish Hospital; Nancy W. Gemeinhart RN, MHA, CIC, Program
Director, BJC Occupational Health Services, BJC HealthCare; Lisa M.
Wojtak RN, BSN, Lead Charge Nurse, Barnes-Jewish Hospital;
Christine C. Zirges RN, ACNS-BC, CIC, Manager, SSM St. Louis
Healthcare Infection Prevention Network, SSM Healthcare; Hilary
Babcock MD, MPH, Assistant Professor of Medicine, Infectious
Diseases Division, Medical Director Infection Prevention &
Epidemiology Consortium, Med. Director Occupational Health,
Washington University in St. Louis, Barnes-Jewish Hospital, St.
Louis Childrens’ Hospital
BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: More than 8 million health care
workers (HCW) in the United States work in hospitals and other
health care settings. Precise national data are not available on the
annual number of needlestick and other percutaneous injuries
among HCW; however, estimates indicate that 600,000 to 800,000
such injuries occur annually [National Institute for Occupational
Safety and Health (NIOSH), 2000]. The active safety engineered
device (SED) is the most widely used device at the trial facility for
the delivery of medications and vaccines, and subcutaneous needle
sticks from these devices account for roughly 35% of the total
number of needlestick injuries (NSI). Objective: To evaluate the
incidence of NSI among HCW with a passive SED, specifically
subcutaneous (SQ) retractable needle, compared to an active SED.
The active SED requires a deliberate activation of the safety feature
to re-sheath the needle, while the passive SED is designed to
automatically retract the needle into the barrel of the syringe once
the medication is delivered.
METHODS: Four medical nursing divisions and one intensive care
unit at a 1,250-bed teaching hospital participated in a passive SED
trial between May 2011 and January 2012. Divisions were selected
based on their higher than average number of NSI over the past
three years and willingness to participate. The existing active SED
were removed from participating units and replaced with the same
size “trial” passive SED. The type of SED was selected based on SQ
injections being the most frequent NSI in those units. Data from
HCW self-reported NSI were collected in an electronic data repository and evaluated. A Fisher’s exact test was calculated for NSI and
productive hours due to a single NSI reported during the trial
period.
RESULTS: During the pre-trial period, 19 NSI were reported with
a rate of 2.21 NSI per 100,000 productive hours. During the 9-
month SED trial period, 1 NSI was reported with a rate of 0.42 NSI
per 100,000 productive hours (Figure 1). Root cause analysis of the
trial period NSI revealed improper use of the device as opposed to
device error. The difference in NSI rates prior to the passive SED
trial and during the trial period was statistically significant (p 
0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides a comparison of NSI rates with
the use of active SQ SED and passive SQ SED. Passive SED significantly reduced the NSI rate.
Presentation Number 8-350
Reduction of Percutaneous Injuries in Healthcare
Workers: Use of a Retractable Winged Steel Needle
Alexandra Derevnuk FNP-C, MEd, Infection Control & Blood &
Body Fluid Exposure Coordinator, Mount Sinai Medcial Center;
Lori Finkelstein-Blond RN, MA, CIC, Director of Performance
Improvement, The Mount Sinai Medical Center; Frances Wallach
MD, Hospital Epidemiologist and Director of Infection Control, The
Mount Sinai Medical Center
S80 Poster Abstracts / American Journal of Infection Control 41 (2013) S25-S145
APIC 40th Annual Conference j Ft Lauderdale, FL j June 8-10, 2013