Soc Psychiatry (1983) 18:193-199 Social Psychiatry
9 Springer-Verlag 1983
Use of the Social Behaviour Assessment Schedule (SBAS) in a trial
of maintenance antipsychotic therapy in schizophrenic outpatients:
pimozide versus fluphenazine
T. R. E. Barnes*, G. Milavic, D. A. Curson** and S. D. Platt***
Academic Unit for Clinical Psychopharmacology, Guy's Hospital Medical School, London Bridge, London, England
Summary. Depot fluphenazine decanoate and oral
pimozide drug treatments were compared in
36schizophrenic outpatients over one year in a
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, utilising a
"double dummy" design. Analysis of Social Behaviour Assessment Schedule (SBAS) data from the pretrial and end-of-study assessments revealed no significant advantage for either of the drug treatments.
However, social performance had improved in both
groups over the trial period and this was associated
with some relief of related "distress" in the patients'
relatives and friends. The most prevalent disturbed
behaviours in the sample reflected the negative
symptoms of schizophrenia and showed no change
over the year. These disturbed behaviours were
much in evidence and were associated with a relatively high level of distress in the patients' relatives
and friends9 These findings suggest that the maintenance therapy of schizophrenic patients, with either
depot fluphenazine or oral pimozide, by controlling
psychotic symptoms and providing a period of illness stability, may allow a natural process of gradual
recovery of social functioning to take place9
Present addresses:
* Psychiatric Research Unit, University of Cambridge Clinical
School, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Trumpington Street, Cambridge
CB2 2QE, England
** St Andrew's Hospital, Billing Road, Northampton NN1 5DG,
England
*** MRC Unit for Epidemiological Studies in Psychiatry, University Department of Psychiatry, Royal Edingburgh Hospital,
Morningside Park, Edinburgh EH10 5HF, Scotland
Introduction
A large number of placebo-controlled studies have
shown that, for schizophrenic patients, following
hospital discharge, maintenance antipsychotic drugs
reduce the relapse rate for at least 2 years (Johnson
1977: Hogarty et al. 1979; Davis et al 1980). The effect of this chronic medication on social functioning
has not been as extensively or systematically investigated. Only two studies have looked carefully at
long-term depot antipsychotic treatment in this regard. In the context of a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial in schizophrenic outpatients by Hirsch et
al. (1973), Stevens (1973) reported that withdrawal of
chronic depot fluphenazine led to a socially significant deterioration in the patients' relationships with
relatives and friends, apparently related to an increase in "positive" symptoms such as aggression,
noisiness, "strange ideas" and socially embarrassing
behaviour. She found that when placebo medication
was substituted the "general sociability" of the patient was reduced, whereas continued depot medication appeared to diminish the burden on family and
supporting friends. Rifkin et al. (1979) compared the
effects of depot and oral fluphenazine with placebo
in terms of the social behaviour of schizophrenic outpatients and cautiously concluded that antipsychotic
drugs "at least in the context of the aftercare clinic
9 and when combined with antiparkinsonian medication, did not interfere with social and vocational
functioning".
With regard to chronic oral medication, a number of controlled trials comparing pimozide with
other antipsychotic drugs have demonstrated a consistent trend in favour of pimozide in terms of its effects on social adjustment (Pinder et al. 1976; Baro et 
194
Table 1. Clinical characteristics and outcome of the two treatment
groups
Pimozide group Fluphenazine
group
(n = 17) (n = 19)
Clinical characteristics
Mean age, years 49.9 (SD 9.5) 49.0 (SD 10.7)
Sex: male 8 10
female 9 9
Mean fluphenazine dose, 8.4 (SD 3.7) 8.2 (SD 4.8)
mg per week
Outcome
Completed trial 12 14
Relapsed 3 3
Withdrawn for medical I 1
reasons
Dropped out l 1
to decrease and social adjustment continue to improve in the weeks following discharge (Waryszak
1982). This process of change represents a confounding variable in studies where patients are recruited
and assessed immediately after leaving hospital.
Thirdly, previous studies suggest that relapse rates in
the first year after hospital discharge are likely to be
about 30-40% (Left and Wing 1971 ; Hogarty et al.
1979, Knights et al. 1979), Thus, those patients surviving for follow-up assessment may constitute an
unrepresentative sample of those who started the
study (Rifkin et al. 1979). The relapse rate might be
expected to be considerably less in an outpatient
population successfully maintained on maintenance
antipsychotic drugs for at least 6 months.
al. 1972). Improvement has been noted in "emotional withdrawal" (Kolivakis et al. 1974; Lapierre and
Lavallee 1975), work performance, household tasks
and social relationships (Donlon et al. 1977; Abuzzahab 1977). It has been suggested that the drug is especially useful for apathetic patients with motor retardation (Chouinard et al. 1970; Cheadle and
Freeman 1979; Stifling 1979). A double-blind controlled trial of oral pimozide and depot fluphenazine
was carried out by Falloon et al. (1978 a, b). Social
functioning was examined over 1 year in a selected
population of schizophrenic patients following hospital discharge. At follow-up the pimozide-treated
patients were more favourably rated on factors such
as sociability, use of leisure, warmth of personal relationships, household tasks and child-rearing.
In view of the claims regarding pimozide and social functioning it was considered important to carry
out a similar comparative trial, employing a sophisticated measure of social behaviour. A stabilised population of schizophrenic outpatients on maintenance
depot medication was chosen, a patient group with
obvious clinical relevance. There were several specific reasons for selecting such a patient sample, rather
than a group of patients recruited after relapse and
hospital admission. Firstly, following hospital discharge, up to a third of schizophrenic patients will
fail to become established on regular depot injections (Johnson 1977) and it has been suggested that
these patients may also be tablet defaulters (Quitkin
eta. 1978; Schooler et al. 1980), Falloon et al.
(1978 a) confirmed that irregular attenders for injection were also poor tablet takers. In a self-selected
population of regular clinic attenders the problem of
poor compliance is minimised. Secondly, treatment
initiated during a hospital admission may produce
changes that persist; symptomatology may continue
Method
Patient selection
All 109outpatients regularly receiving depot fluphenazine decanoate at a catchment area, Community Nurses' clinic in South London (London Borough of Southwark), were screened diagnostically
using the Syndrome Check List derived from the
Ninth Edition of the Present State Examination
(PSE) (Wing et al. 1974). Patients were excluded on
the following criteria: if there were any doubt about
the diagnosis of schizophrenia (38cases); if they
were unwilling to enter the trial (6 cases); if they had
been on regular depot fluphenazine for less than
6 months (8 cases); if they had a severe physical illness (5 cases); or if their equivalent pimozide dose
were calculated to be over 20 mg per day (7 cases). In
addition, a small number of patients failed to enter
the study for administrative reasons, e.g. moved out
of the area or discharged during the assesssment period, or because injections were administered at
home (9 cases).
Design
The study was double-blind using a "double-dummy" design. Patients were assigned to two groups by
an independent statistician, matched on the basis of
age, sex and calculated weekly fluphenazine dose
(Table 1). Of the 36 patients who entered the trial,
19continued to receive their depot fluphenazine
dose unchanged but were given additional placebo
tablets, and 17 received both placebo injections and
pimozide tablets. For the latter group their previous
fluphenazine injection dose was converted into an
equivalent oral pimozide dose, using a ratio of 8 mg
pimozide daily to 25 mg fluphenazine every 2 weeks. 
195
Table 2. Most prevalent disturbed behaviours and social performance limitations at beginning and end of trial
Disturbed behaviour Prevalence Social performance limitations Prevalence
(%) (%)
Baseline: (n = 36) Underactivity 58.3 Spare-time activities 77.8
Withdrawal 55.5 Household management 61.1
Slowness 33.3 Everyday conversation 58.3
Worrying 30.5 Household tasks 52.8
Irritability 27.7 Decision-making 41.7
Affection/friendliness 36.1
1 year: (n = 35) Withdrawal 37.1 Everyday conversation 48.6
Forgetful 34.2 Household management 45.7
Underactivity 28.5 Spare-time activities 40.0
Worrying 28.5 Household tasks 37.1
Slowness 25.7 Decision-making 34.3
Affection/friendliness 25.7
Both groups continued to attend the clinic regularly
to receive their injections and tablet supply.
Assessment of social behaviour
The Social Behaviour Assessment Schedule (SBAS),
developed by Platt et al. (1980), is a standardised,
semi-structured interview which provides objective
definitions for rating various aspects of a patient's
behaviour and also allows scoring of the informant's
subjective evaluation of the distress these may engender. This instrument also distinguishes between
specific behavioural disturbances, such as underactivity, withdrawal and irritability, and more general
'deficiencies' in social performance, i. e. the failure to
fulfil certain social roles, such as housewife, parent,
sexual partner and companion. The distress felt by
the family, and others close to the patient, in response to each disturbed behaviour and social performance limitation, is separately recorded.
The SBAS was completed, for each subject, pretrial, at 1 year and, if applicable, at relapse. All baseline evaluations were completed prior to group allocation, unlike recent, similar studies in which the
initial social assessments were carried out after trial
medication had been started (Falloon et al. 1978b;
Schooler et al. 1980). All trial subjects, including relapse cases, were followed up. Unfortunately, the
SBAS data were incomplete for one relapsed patient
who was abroad from the time of relapse to the end
of the trial.
Results
Clinical characteristics and outcome are summarised
in Table 1. There was no significant difference between the relapse rates in the two groups. None of
the patients completing the study required alteration
of drug dosage during the trial.
The baseline comparisons for the two treatment
groups, on social variables and informants for the
SBAS, revealed no significant differences. Thus, the
two groups were relatively well-matched on items
such as the number of single and married patients,
and the proportion of informants who were living in
the same household and their frequency of patient
contact.
The essential comparison in this study was between schizophrenic outpatients continuing on regular depot fluphenazine and a matched group
switched to oral pimozide, over 1 year, under normal
clinical conditions. A "pragmatic" rather than "explanatory" attitude was adopted (Schwartz and Lellouch 1967); the results were analysed so as to provide an overall comparison of the consequences of
employing the two drug therapies in practice. Therefore, the 1-year follow-up results of all patients who
had begun the trial, including drop-outs, withdrawals and relapsers, were involved in the analysis. Information derived from the SBAS interviews, which
relates to "disturbed behaviour" and "social performance limitations", is presented below. A second
analysis, including only follow-up data related to the
26 patients completing the study, did not differ significantly from the results outlined here.
Disturbed behaviour
A list of the disturbed behaviours present in more
than a quarter of the total sample is given in Table 2.
The fluphenazine patients showed a higher mean
disturbed behaviour score at the onset. However, only one item, "worry", showed a significant difference
between the groups (Fisher's exact test, P< 0.05), being more commonly reported in the fluphenazine 
196
Table 3. Changes in disturbed behaviour and the related distress
of informants over trial period
Pimozide Fluphenazine
Baseline: Disturbed 4.2 (SD 5.5) 5.7 (SD 4.1"~
behaviour,
mean score
1 year: Disturbed 4.4 (SD 4.2) 4.1 (SD 4.9) I
behaviour,
mean score
Baseline: Mean informant 2.2 (SD 3.1) 3.5 (SD 3.9)
distress score
1year: Mean informant 2.2 (SD 3.4) 3.0 (SD 5.3)
distress score
0.I>P>0.05
Table 4. Changes in social performance limitations and the related
distress of informants over the trial period
Pimozide Fluphenazine
Baseline: Social performance 11.1 (SD 6.6) 9.7 (SD 6.9-'~
limitations, mean
score !
1 year: Social performance 7.1 (SD 6.9) 7.3 (SD 6.1_~
limitations, mean
score
Baseline: Mean informant 2.0 (SD 2.2) 2.7 (SD 2.9)
distress score
I year: Mean informant 1.6 (SD 2.7) 2.1 (SD 2.5)
distress score
P<0.05
patients. Over 1 year the mean disturbed behaviour
scores remained stable in the pimozide group and
showed only a slight improvement for the fluphenazine group, a change which approaches statistical
significance (0.1 > P> 0.05) (Table 3). In order to
control for the disparity between the two groups pretrial, an analysis of covariance, with the baseline disturbed behaviour score as the covariant, was carried
out. Although the intergroup difference in scores at
follow-up was increased, this did not reach statistical
significance.
Informant distress in response to disturbed behaviour is represented in Table 3 by a mean score for
"moderate" and "severe" distress ratings, which incorporates a score for a "resignation" rating. Over
the trial period the distress scores indicate a slight reduction in the fluphenazine group but no change in
the pimozide group. As the distress scores are highly
positively correlated with the behaviour measures, a
further covariant analysis was performed on the distress scores to take account of the concurrent level of
disturbed behaviour. No significant change over the
trial period or significant differences between the
drug groups were revealed.
In the total population, over the year, almost half
of the patients (49%) showed improvement in disturbed behaviour, 43% deteriorated and 9% remained the same. These changes are reflected in the
related distress scores which were reduced in just
over one-third (34%), increased in the same percentage, and unchanged in the remainder (31%).
Social performance limitations
The social behaviours identified as limited in over a
quarter of the total sample are listed in Table 2.
There were no significant differences in prevalence
between the two drug groups pre-trial. Table 4 gives
the mean social performance limitation scores, adjusted for the number of SBAS items applicable for
each patient (see Platt et al. 1980), and these show a
marked reduction over the trial period. The improvement was statistically significant in the fluphenazine
group (Fisher's exact test, P < 0.05), and for the total
population (P<0.02). Overall, almost two-thirds
(66%) of the patients showed improvement and informant distress was reduced in nearly a half (49%).
As with the disturbed behaviour scores, an analysis of covariance was performed on the follow-up
scores for social performance using the initial scores
as the covariant. The inter-group differences remained statistically insignificant. Because the related
distress measures are positively correlated with the
patients' social performance scores, the mean distress scores for the two groups at baseline and I year
were compared, controlling for concurrent differences in social performance ratings. This further
analysis yielded no statistically significant differences in informant distress scores for either between
group comparisons or changes in scores over the trial
period.
Relapsed patients
Six patients experienced a marked exacerbation of
their psychotic symptoms, and all required increased
antipsychotic medication and hospital admission.
SBAS information was collected at relapse in only
5cases, 1 relapse patient being abroad. Relapse
SBAS assessments were compared with the pre-trial
assessments. Disturbed behaviour had increased
markedly in 3 patients but only marginally in the
other 2. Overall, the mean disturbed behaviour score
for the 5patients at relapse (15.6) was more than
double their mean score at the start of the trial (7.2).
A change in social performance was only apparent in
2 cases; I showing a slight improvement, the other a
deterioration. Following relapse, none of the patients
continued on the trial medication regime. 
197
Discussion
Some of the problems inherent in the detailed social
assessment of a population of chronic psychiatric
patients, were highlighted by the use of the SBAS
and the comprehensive nature of the data collected.
For example, nearly a quarter of the total study population (22%) lived alone, with few friends and
acquaintances and only rare contact with relatives.
In such cases, informants are not available to provide reliable information on day-to-day social functioning. In addition, in the same percentage of trial
subjects, the most suitable informants available had
been in contact with the patients only once in the
month preceding the first SBAS interview, and did
not live with the patients in 42% of cases. Many of
the SBAS items, such as performance on household
tasks and management and spare time activities,
might not be reliably estimated by informants not in
the same household, and distress ratings are not directly applicable. Not only do these factors restrict
the information available, but it would be virtually
impossible to match patients on all the social variables included in the SBAS in order to produce comparable groups for research. Fortunately, there were
few significant differences between the two drug
groups on social behaviour measures at pretrial assessment, and statistical analysis to control for those
disparities that were present did not significantly alter the basic findings.
Creer and Wing (1974) carried out similar social
assessments on 30 schizophrenic outpatients in the
London Borough of Camberwell, a population
roughly comparable with that of the present study on
most social and demographic characteristics. They
interviewed a similar range of informants and identified the 'behavioural characteristics' of patients, occurling to a 'rather marked' or 'very marked' extent.
The most frequently identified behavioural characteristics were social withdrawal (70%), slowness
(70%), lack of conversation (53%), underactivity
(50%) and few leisure interests (43%). Allowing for
slight differences in terminology, these appear to
correspond to the three most prevalent disturbed behaviours and two of the three most prevalent social
performance limitations (Table 2) identified with the
baseline SBAS interviews in this present study. Thus,
our findings corroborate those of Creer and Wing in
this regard. Although performance in social roles
was also assessed by Creer and Wing, differences in
the definition of behaviours and data collection render more elaborate comparisons between the studies
inappropriate.
The results of this trial indicate no particular advantage to either depot fluphenazine or oral pimozide in terms of effect on disturbed behaviour. The
relative absence of behaviours that might qualify as
'positive psychotic symptoms', such as odd ideas,
overactivity, rudeness and violence, implies that
these were well controlled by maintenance drug
treatment. The problems most often present, such as
underactivity, withdrawal, slowness and worrying,
showed an equivocal response to both drugs over the
year, and the associated burden to relatives and
friends, as measured by informant distress scores,
was virtually unchanged. It was found that the addition of ratings for an informant response of 'resignation' with a score equivalent to 'moderate' distress,
almost doubled the mean informant distress scores
in this population, indicating how important resignation is as a measure of burden.
Social performance limitations were commonly
reported for patients, in activities such as use of
spare time, household management, household tasks
and everyday conversation. The social performance
scores showed a marked improvement during the trial in both drug groups. The reduction in scores was
statistically significant for the fluphenazine patients
and for the total population. The informant distress
scores relating to these performance difficulties were
marginally but consistently lower than those associated with the disturbed behaviours reported. For
both groups they showed a reduction over the year.
These findings are in accord with those of previous
studies of social adjustment and drug effects. The
improved functioning of community-based schizophrenic patients found by Falloon et al. (1978b) involved, almost exclusively, ~social performance'
items, e.g. sociability, leisure activities, relationships
with close associates, housekeeping and child-rearing.
It might be predicted from our results that withdrawal of antipsychotic medication would lead to a
rapid increase in positive psychotic symptoms, a
slower but serious deterioration in social performance and little change in the 'negative' disturbed
behaviours such as underactivity and withdrawal,
which seemed to be relatively uninfluenced by drug
treatment. Stevens' findings (Stevens 1973) appear to
confirm this hypothesis to some extent; placebo substitution of depot fluphenazine led to deterioration
in social performance as judged by a reduction in
general sociability, lack of support from the patient
and a decrease in co-operation with the household
chores. She considered that 'negative psychotic
symptoms' such as social withdrawal and self-neglect, which we found to be common 'disturbed behaviours', were less effectively controlled by the fluphenazine than 'positive' symptoms. 
198
The question remains: why should any improvement in social performance have been detected in
such a stable schizophrenic group over i year, especially as the fluphenazine patients had continued on
their drug treatment unchanged except for the addition of placebo tablets? One possible explanation for
the finding would be that additional treatments influenced the outcome. However, no active rehabilitation or social therapy programme was being carried
out concurrently, and the intervention related to the
trial itself was relatively small and unlikely to account for improvement in such a specific area of social functioning as role performance. Falloon et al.
(1978b) suggested that pimozide might have a less
deleterious effect on "social functioning", compared
with depot fluphenazine, because it is associated
with fewer parkinsonian features. As no advantage
to the pimozide-treated group, in terms of social
functioning, was demonstrated in this study, no such
hypothesis is relevant. The most plausible explanation seems to be that social performance almost certainly deteriorates during schizophrenic relapse and,
following control of positive psychotic symptoms,
gradual recovery only occurs over a prolonged period of stability.
Such a conclusion is based upon the assumption
that the finding of an improvement in social performance reflects a genuine change, and not an artefact produced by instability in the SBAS. However,
Platt et al. (1980) have previously demonstrated the
reliability and sensitivity of this instrument. In addition, in a study of the effects of hospital admission
on psychiatric patients (Platt et al. 1981) the SBAS
scores revealed a significant improvement in both
behaviour and social functioning over the first
2 weeks of admission but only minimal change over
the subsequent 3 months. In the present study, the
changes detected were limited to social performance
and related informant distress. Overall, the findings
of these studies suggest that there is no inherent tendency for the SBAS to detect any change in social behaviour other than a true one.
Conclusion
Despite the general difficulties involved in the reliable assessment of social functioning and the relatively small number of patients studied, tentative
conclusions may be drawn from these findings. Firstly, the SBAS appears to be a valid instrument for the
assessment of social behaviour in chronic schizophrenic patients. Secondly, both disturbed behaviour and social performance limitations in schizophrenic patients can cause distress for the family and
others involved in supporting the patient. The distress associated with disturbed behaviour would
seem to be greater than that experienced in response
to social performance limitations. Thirdly, the results
also suggest that maintenance antipsychotic medication, by controlling psychotic symptoms and preventing further relapse, may allow a natural process
of slow recovery of social functioning to occur. For
the total patient sample a statistically significant improvement in social performance was found, over
the trial period. This overall improvement in social
performance limitations was accompanied by a
small reduction in the associated distress of informants. Lastly, there was no clear advantage for either
drug on any of the outcome measures reported here,
but the findings are consistent with previous evidence that oral pimozide is clinically at least as effective as fluphenazine decanoate injections in the
maintenance treatment of schizophrenic patients
(Shepherd 1979).
Acknowledgements. We are grateful to Dr. R. N. Gaind for permission to study patients under his care and also to Mr. A. Williams,
Chief Pharmacist, and the Community Sisters, at St. Olave's Hospital, for their help and co-operation.
References
Abuzzahab FS (1977) Evaluations of social functioning in a 3-year
double-blind investigation of pimozide versus fluphenazine in
chronic schizophrenia. Psychopharmacol Bull 13 : 71-73
Baro F, Van Lommel R, Dorn R, De Mesmaecker L (1972) Pimozide treatment of chronic schizophrenics as compared with haloperidol and penfluridol. Acta Psychiatr Belg 72:199-214
Cheadle A J, Freeman HL (1979) Pimozide in the maintenance
treatment of apathetic and emotionally withdrawn schizophrenics. Curr Med Res Opin 6:35-43
Chouinard G, Lehmann HE, Bann TA (1970) Pimozide in the
treatment of chronic schizophrenic patients. Curr Ther Res 12:
598-603
Creer C, Wing JK (1974) Schizophrenia at home. National Schizophrenia Fellowship, Surrey
Davis JM, Schaffer CB, Killian GA, Kinard C, Chan C (1980) Important issues in the drug treatment of schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull 6:70-87
Donlon PT, Swaback DO, Osborne ML (1977) Pimozide versus
fluphenazine in ambulatory schizophrenics: a 12-month comparison study. Dis Nerv System 38:119-123
Falloon I, Watt DC, Shepherd M (1978a) A comparative controlled trial of pimozide and fluphenazine decanoate in the continuation therapy of schizophrenia. Psychol Med 8: 59-70
Falloon I, Watt DC, Shepherd M (1978b) The social outcome of
patients in a trial of long-term continuation therapy in schizophrenia: pimozide vs. fluphenazine. Psychol Med 8:265-274
Hirsch SR, Gaind R, Rohde PD, Stevens BC, Wing JK (1973) Outpatient maintenance of chronic schizophrenic patients with
long-acting fluphenazine: a double-blind placebo trial. Br Med
J 1 : 633-637
Hogarty GE, Schooler NR, Ulrich R, Mussare F, Ferro P, Herron
E (1979) Fluphenazine and social therapy in the aftercare of
schizophrenic patients. Arch Gen Psychiatry 36:1283-1294 
199
Johnson DAW (1977) Practical considerations in the use of depot
neuroleptics for the treatment of schizophrenia. Br J Hosp Med
17: 546-558
Knights A, Okasha MS, Salih MA, Hirsch SR (1979) Depressive
and extrapyramidal symptoms and clinical effects: a trial of fluphenazine versus flupenthixol in maintenance of schizophrenic
outpatients. Br J Psychiatry 135:515-523
Kolivakis T, Azim H, Kingstone E (1974) A double-blind comparison of pimozide and chlorpromazine in the maintenance care
of chronic schizophrenic outpatients. Curr Ther Res 16:
998-1004
Lapierre YD, Lavallee J (1975) Pimozide and the social behaviour
of schizophrenics. Curr Ther Res 18: 181-188
Left JP, Wing JK (1971) Trial of maintenance therapy in schizophrenia. Br Med J 3:599-604
Pinder RM, Brogden RN, Sawyer PR, Speight TM, Spencer R,
Avery GS (1976) Pimozide: a review of its pharmacological
properties and therapeutic uses in psychiatry. Drugs 12:1-40
Platt S, Weyman A, Hirsch S, Hewett S (1980) The Social Behaviour Assessment Schedule (SBAS): rationale, contents, scoring
and reliability of a new interview schedule. Soc Psychiatry 15:
43-55
Platt S, Hirsch SR, Knights AC (1981) Effects of brief hospitalisation on psychiatric patients' behaviour and social functioning.
Acta Psychiatr Scand 63:117-128
Quitkin F, Rifkin J, Kane J, Ramos-Lorenzi R, Klein DF (1978)
Long-acting oral vs. injectable antipsychotie drugs in schizophrenics. Arch Gen Psychiatry 35:889-892
Rifkin A, Quitkin F, Kane J, Klein DF, Ross D (1979) The effect
of fluphenazine upon social and vocational functioning in remitted schizophrenics. Biol Psychiatry 14:499-508
Schooler NR, Levine J, Severe JB, Brauzer B, DiMascio A, Klerman GL, Tuason VB ('1980) Prevention of relapse in schizophrenia: an evaluation of fluphenazine decanoate. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 37:16-24
Schwartz D, Lellouch J (1967) Explanatory and pragmatic attitudes in therapeutic trials. J Chron Dis 20:637-648
Shepherd M (1979) Medico-social evaluation of the long-term
pharmacotherapy of schizophrenia. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol 3 : 383-389
Stevens BC (1973) The role of fluphenazine in lessening the burden of chronic schizophrenics in the community. Psychol Med
3:141-158
Stirling GS (1979) Pimozide as a replacement for maintenance
therapy in chronic schizophrenia. Curr Med Res Opin 6:
331-337
Waryszak Z (1982) Symptomatology and social adjustment of psychiatric patients before and after hospitalisation. Soe Psychiatry
17:149-154
Wing JK, Cooper JE, Sartorious N (1974) The measurement and
classification of psychiatric symptoms. Cambridge University
Press, London
Accepted 7 March 1983
T. R. E. Barnes
Psychiatric Research Unit
University of Cambridge Clinical School
Addenbrooke's Hospital
Trumpington Street
Cambridge CB2 2QE, UK 