symptoms and cognitive functioning in ultra high risk patients and
healthy controls.
Methods: 63 Ultra high risk patients (34 cannabis users) and 58
control subjects (28 cannabis users) were assessed with clinical
measures and a neuropsychological test battery. Patients were
eligible for the study if they were between the ages of 12 and
35 years and if they fell in one or more of the following inclusion
groups: familial risk and reduced functioning, attenuated psychotic
symptoms, brief limited intermittent psychotic symptoms and basic
symptoms. Control subjects were eligible for the study if they were
between the ages 12 and 35, had no present or past psychiatric
illness, no family history of psychiatric illness, no drug use in the
non cannabis using group and use of at least 4 joints per week in
the cannabis using control group.
Results: In the UHR and the control group, cannabis users experienced
more basic symptoms and UHR symptoms than the non cannabis
users. Moreover, cannabis users in the control group performed at the
level of the UHR subjects on a test of verbal memory and verbal fluency.
Frequency of cannabis use correlated with UHR and basic symptoms.
Conclusions: Our results show that cannabis using UHR patients
have more basic symptoms than non using patients. In addition
healthy cannabis users have more subclinical UHR and basic
symptoms and more neuropsychological dysfunctions than non
cannabis users. Our results show that more frequent cannabis use is
related to increased severity of basic and UHR symptoms.
doi:10.1016/j.schres.2010.02.182
THE METHAMPHETAMINE AND PSYCHOSIS STUDY
(MAPS) – INDIVIDUAL PROFILES AND TREATMENT NEEDS
Tania Lecomte
Universite de Montreal, Quebec, Canada
Background: Multiple studies are investigating the impact of
substance abuse on early psychosis. Stimulants such as methamphetamines (MA), while known to precipitate psychosis, are
understudied. The prevalence of MA abuse in young individuals
showing signs of early psychosis is dramatically high in Western
North America, as is the prevalence of psychosis in young MA
abusers. MA lifetime use by youth diagnosed with psychosis ranges
from 21-33%. Common reasons for drug misuse in first episode
clients range from increased pleasure, reduced depression and
anxiety, and enhanced social facilitation. Individuals who abuse
drugs, particularly stimulants such as MA, tend to have their first
hospitalization earlier than non-misusing peers with schizophrenia,
present with more severe symptoms, and have more problems in
areas of interpersonal relationships, motivation, role functioning
and activities. For many people, the substance abuse may precede
the onset of the illness, whereas for others MA abuse may coincide
with the onset, or even follow the onset of psychosis. Sixty-90% of
first episode psychosis youth have abused drugs prior to their first
psychiatric contact, suggesting a strong connection between
psychosis and substances. Recent studies suggest that MA users
with psychosis are much more likely to experience psychotic
symptoms again if they use MA, and are also more likely to have a
psychotic relapse when confronted with stressful situations, even
years after cessation of MA use. MA users with persistent or
recurrent psychotic symptoms become vulnerable to stress and may
benefit from antipsychotic medication the same way individuals
with schizophrenia do.
Method: Our study aimed at describing the profiles of individuals with
MA abuse and psychotic symptoms. We also wished to determine
patterns of abuse and psychotic symptoms over time. 295 participants
were interviewed following at least one episode of acute psychotic
symptoms linked to MA abuse, and followed with monthly measures
of substance abuse and psychiatric symptoms for six months.
Results: Most participants lived in transitional housing or were homeless. Only 13% had no family history of mental illness or substance abuse.
Close to 70% had a previous diagnosis of a mental illness. Antisocial
personality disorder (68%), depression (67%), and post-traumatic stress
disorder (49%) were highly prevalent. Risk factors and trajectories of
substance abuse and psychotic symptoms will also be presented.
Treatment: Integrated dual-disorder treatment, where the mental health
team works in collaboration with the substance abuse counsellors, is
considered the evidenced-based treatment for individuals presenting
with co-occurring substance abuse and severe mental illness. Such
treatments include step-wise interventions, often using CBT and
motivational interviewing components, and can be found in various
settings, including assertive community treatments. However, only some
of the difficulties presented by participants in our study are addressed in
these programs. Our team is currently working on developing modular
programs for people with early psychosis and various concurrent
disorders. Some examples of these treatment modules will be presented.
doi:10.1016/j.schres.2010.02.183
CLOZAPINE VS. RISPERIDONE FOR PEOPLE WITH FIRST EPISODE
SCHIZOPHRENIA AND CO-OCCURRING CANNABIS USE DISORDER
Douglas Noordsy, Jessica, Alan Green
Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH, USA
Background: Schizophrenia with comorbid substance use disorder is
associated with increased morbidity and mortality. Early in the course
of schizophrenia, cannabis is one of the most commonly abused
substances. Patients with schizophrenia who use cannabis have earlier
age of onset, higher rates of relapse and poorer outcomes. Repeated
relapse has been associated with progression of schizophrenia to a
more treatment resistant illness. Clozapine is the most effective
antipsychotic and has been shown to increase time in remission for
first episode patients. Clozapine has also been shown to decrease
cannabis use in patients with schizophrenia. Thus, patients with first
episode schizophrenia and co-occurring cannabis use disorder (CUD)
may be candidates for the use of clozapine first-line, in an attempt to
improve the long-term course of this disorder. This pilot study is
assessing whether treating patients with first episode schizophrenia
and comorbid CUD with clozapine will lead to increased abstinence
from cannabis and better illness outcomes as compared to those
treated with risperidone over 24 weeks of treatment.
Methods: We are aiming to recruit 21 subjects, age 17-45, meeting
DSM-IV criteria for schizophrenia and for cannabis abuse or dependence, who have less than 16 weeks of prior antipsychotic treatment,
and demonstrate use of cannabis in past 35 days. Participants are
randomized to flexible-dose treatment with clozapine or risperidone
for 24 weeks. The lowest dose of antipsychotic necessary for treatment
of psychotic symptoms is used. Medication drop-outs are followed in
intent-to-treat fashion. A lifestyle intervention including education,
goal setting and behavioral log of diet, exercise and stress management
is provided to minimize metabolic changes. Weight, waist circumference, laboratory values and symptom, side effect and functional rating
scales are administered at regular intervals.
Results: Fourteen participants have been randomized to medication
thus far, 13 have taken study medication. Mean age is 23 years, 57%
male, all Caucasian. Mean daily doses are 75 mg for clozapine, and
3.1 for risperidone. Of 7 participants assigned to clozapine, 3 (43%)
completed the study on clozapine and 4 terminated prior to
24 weeks. Of 7 participants assigned to risperidone, 4 (57%)
Abstracts 165
completed on risperidone, 2 terminated early, and 1 never took
medication. All clozapine completers chose to continue clozapine at
study termination (for up to 2.5 years), while 2 of 4 risperidone
completers chose to discontinue antipsychotic treatment and a
third changed antipsychotics at study termination. Substance use,
psychopathology, cognitive and functional outcomes will be
analyzed at the completion of the study.
Discussion: About half of participants in the clozapine group have
discontinued treatment early, a rate similar to previous firstepisode schizophrenia studies in the US. There were no discontinuations due to lack of efficacy in either group, but several
discontinuations due to inability to tolerate medication side effects
in clozapine group. Patients with first-episode schizophrenia and
CUD can be recruited into a randomized trial of clozapine. A subset
of participants in each group is able to complete a 6-month trial of
their assigned medication. Clozapine completers have demonstrated strong interest in remaining on this medication.
doi:10.1016/j.schres.2010.02.184
Symposium 34
NEWER ANTIPSYCHOTIC DRUGS IN EARLY-ONSET
PSYCHOSIS: A TRANSLATIONAL VIEW
Co-Chairpersons: Sanjiv Kumra, Frank Tarazi
Wednesday, 14 April, 2010 - 2:00 pm - 4:00 pm
Overall Abstract: Due to the relative rarity of schizophrenia in
children andadolescents, the conduct of antipsychotic treatment
studies with informativesample sizes in this population has proven
difficult. The overall goal of thispanel is to improve the design and
conduct of clinical trials in pediatricschizophrenia. The panel will
bring together clinical investigators andtranslational scientists to
evaluate the evidence for existing treatments forpediatric schizophrenia and the latest information on the effectiveness andside
effects of antipsychotic treatments that are relevant to pediatricschizophrenia in order to identify the most urgent clinical
questions in thisarea. There have been a number ofrecently
completed placebo-controlled and active comparator trials of
newerantipsychotic drugs in children and adolescents. We review
this experience to identify the uniquedevelopmental aspects
associated with the treatment of pediatric schizophrenia;and the
challenges and the lessons that have been learned in conductingclinical trials in this population. Lastly, we will examine some new
animaldata that provide insight for understanding the observed
age-related differencesin side effect profiles of antipsychotic drugs
between young and adultpatients.Key objectives ofthis symposium
are to summarize authoritatively and succinctly theimportant
recent advances in pharmacological and clinical understanding
ofnewer antipsychotics in young patients, and to integrate the
available basic and clinical findings so as toguide future research
efforts. This symposium will contribute to improved understanding
of cerebralaction mechanisms of this important class of psychotropic agents, and ofemerging principles aimed at improved
treatments for early-onset psychotic andmajor affective disorders.
doi:10.1016/j.schres.2010.02.185
IS THERE A ROLE FOR CLOZAPINE IN CHILDREN AND
ADOLESCENTS WITH SCHIZOPHRENIA?
Sanjiv Kumra
Department of Psychiatry, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA
Background: In adults with schizophrenia, neuroleptic resistance is
associated with an early onset of psychosis. A recent study in youth
with schizophrenia revealed high rates of treatment discontinuation during an 8-week trial to all three randomized drugs (e.g.,
molindone, risperidone, olanzapine). However, serious concerns
about metabolic adverse side effects to olanzapine were raised. A
previous study demonstrated that clozapine was superior to
haloperidol. Because olanzapine has been shown to have superiority to other typically used 'first-line' agents in adults with
schizophrenia, the present study compared the effectiveness and
safety of clozapine versus "high-dose" olanzapine in treatmentrefractory adolescents with schizophrenia.
Methods: Children, ages 10-18 years, who met DSM-IV criteria for
schizophrenia and who were resistant or intolerant to at least two
antipsychotic drugs were randomized to receive 12 weeks of
double-blind flexibly dosed treatment with clozapine (n= 18) or
"high-dose" olanzapine (up to 30 mg/day) (n=21). The primary
efficacy measure was response (improvement), defined as a
decrease of 30% or more in total BPRS score from baseline and a
CGI scale improvement rating of "1" (very much improved) or "2"
(much improved). Patients were then followed in a 12-week openlabel trial to monitor adverse effects.
Results: Significantly more clozapine-treated adolescents met response criteria (66%) compared with olanzapine-treated subjects
(33%) during the double-blind portion of the study. Clozapine was
superior to olanzapine in terms of reduction of the psychosis cluster
scores and negative symptoms from baseline to end point. However,
both treatments were associated with significant weight-gain and
related metabolic abnormalities at 12- and 24-weeks post-treatment.
Conclusions: This double-blind randomized comparison of two
second-generation antipsychotic drugs for treatment-refractory
adolescents with schizophrenia supports clozapine as the agent of
choice. The results are similar to a recent NIMH completed doubleblind comparison of clozapine vs. 'standard-dose' olanzapine, and
do not support a hypothesis that metabolic side effects associated
with olanzapine are dose-related. We will also present long-term
safety data and pilot data regarding potential mechanisms underlying clozapine-induced weight gain.
doi:10.1016/j.schres.2010.02.186
EFFICACY AND SAFETY OF ANTIPSYCHOTICS IN ADOLESCENTS
WITH EARLY-ONSET SCHIZOPHRENIA
Christoph U. Correll
The Zucker Hillside Hospital, Glen Oaks, NY, USA
Background: Until recently, controlled safety and efficacy data of
antipsychotics in youth with schizophrenia have been scarce. This
has changed with the completion of a number of placebo-controlled
and active controlled trials. We aimed to provide an overview of the
available and emerging controlled efficacy and safety data of
antipsychotics in youth with pediatric schizophrenia.
Methods: Systematic review and summary of published and
unpublished data from randomized placebo-controlled and activecontrolled studies of antipsychotics in children and adolescents.
Results. 14 randomized, controlled trials (n= 1,155) were found. Six
trials had a placebo comparator and evaluated haloperidol (N= 2,
n=67), loxapine (N= 1, n=51), aripiprazole (N= 1, n= 301),
quetiapine (N= 1, n= 220), risperidone (N= 1, n= 160, and
olanzapine (N= 1, n=107), and one trial (n= 279) used low dose
risperidone (0.15-0.6 mg/day) as pseudo-placebo comparator. 7
trials (n= 275) compared antipsychotics head-to-head, including
thiothixene vs thioridazine (N= 1, n= 21), haloperidol vs olanza166 Abstracts