Steven R. Messé, Pamela H. Mitchell, Magdy Selim and Rafael J. Tamargo
Broderick, E. Sander Connolly, Jr, Steven M. Greenberg, James N. Huang, R. Loch Macdonald,
Lewis B. Morgenstern, J. Claude Hemphill III, Craig Anderson, Kyra Becker, Joseph P.
Association
for Healthcare Professionals From the American Heart Association/American Stroke
Guidelines for the Management of Spontaneous Intracerebral Hemorrhage: A Guideline
Print ISSN: 0039-2499. Online ISSN: 1524-4628
Copyright © 2010 American Heart Association, Inc. All rights reserved.
Stroke is published by the American Heart Association, 7272 Greenville Avenue, Dallas, TX 75231
doi: 10.1161/STR.0b013e3181ec611b
Stroke. 2010;41:2108-2129; originally published online July 22, 2010;
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/41/9/2108
World Wide Web at:
The online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is located on the
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/suppl/2012/03/12/STR.0b013e3181ec611b.DC1.html
Data Supplement (unedited) at:

http://stroke.ahajournals.org//subscriptions/
Subscriptions: Information about subscribing to Stroke is online at:

http://www.lww.com/reprints
Reprints: Information about reprints can be found online at:

process is available in the Permissions and Rights Question and Answer document.
Request Permissions in the middle column of the Web page under Services. Further information about this
Once the online version of the published article for which permission is being requested is located, click
in Stroke can be obtained via RightsLink, a service of the Copyright Clearance Center, not the Editorial Office.
Permissions: Requests for permissions to reproduce figures, tables, or portions of articles originally published
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on May 27, 2014
AHA/ASA Guideline
Guidelines for the Management of Spontaneous
Intracerebral Hemorrhage
A Guideline for Healthcare Professionals From the American Heart
Association/American Stroke Association
The American Academy of Neurology affirms the value of this guideline as an educational
tool for neurologists.
The American Association of Neurological Surgeons and the Congress of Neurological
Surgeons have reviewed this document and affirm its educational content.
Lewis B. Morgenstern, MD, FAHA, FAAN, Chair;
J. Claude Hemphill III, MD, MAS, FAAN, Vice-Chair; Craig Anderson, MBBS, PhD, FRACP;
Kyra Becker, MD; Joseph P. Broderick, MD, FAHA; E. Sander Connolly, Jr, MD, FAHA;
Steven M. Greenberg, MD, PhD, FAHA, FAAN; James N. Huang, MD; R. Loch Macdonald, MD, PhD;
Steven R. Messé, MD, FAHA; Pamela H. Mitchell, RN, PhD, FAHA, FAAN;
Magdy Selim, MD, PhD, FAHA; Rafael J. Tamargo, MD; on behalf of the American Heart Association
Stroke Council and Council on Cardiovascular Nursing
Purpose—The aim of this guideline is to present current and comprehensive recommendations for the diagnosis and
treatment of acute spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage.
Methods—A formal literature search of MEDLINE was performed. Data were synthesized with the use of evidence tables.
Writing committee members met by teleconference to discuss data-derived recommendations. The American Heart
Association Stroke Council’s Levels of Evidence grading algorithm was used to grade each recommendation. Prerelease
review of the draft guideline was performed by 6 expert peer reviewers and by the members of the Stroke Council
Scientific Statements Oversight Committee and Stroke Council Leadership Committee. It is intended that this guideline
be fully updated in 3 years’ time.
Results—Evidence-based guidelines are presented for the care of patients presenting with intracerebral hemorrhage. The
focus was subdivided into diagnosis, hemostasis, blood pressure management, inpatient and nursing management,
preventing medical comorbidities, surgical treatment, outcome prediction, rehabilitation, prevention of recurrence, and
future considerations.
Conclusions—Intracerebral hemorrhage is a serious medical condition for which outcome can be impacted by early,
aggressive care. The guidelines offer a framework for goal-directed treatment of the patient with intracerebral
hemorrhage. (Stroke. 2010;41:2108-2129.)
Key Words: AHA Scientific Statements  intracerebral hemorrhage  treatment  diagnosis
 intracranial pressure  hydrocephalus  surgery
The American Heart Association makes every effort to avoid any actual or potential conflicts of interest that may arise as a result of an outside
relationship or a personal, professional, or business interest of a member of the writing panel. Specifically, all members of the writing group are required
to complete and submit a Disclosure Questionnaire showing all such relationships that might be perceived as real or potential conflicts of interest.
This statement was approved by the American Heart Association Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee on May 19, 2010. A copy of the
statement is available at http://www.americanheart.org/presenter.jhtml?identifier3003999 by selecting either the “topic list” link or the “chronological
list” link (No. KB-0044). To purchase additional reprints, call 843-216-2533 or e-mail kelle.ramsay@wolterskluwer.com.
The American Heart Association requests that this document be cited as follows: Morgenstern LB, Hemphill JC 3rd, Anderson C, Becker K, Broderick
JP, Connolly ES Jr, Greenberg SM, Huang JN, Macdonald RL, Messé SR, Mitchell PH, Selim M, Tamargo RJ; on behalf of the American Heart
Association Stroke Council and Council on Cardiovascular Nursing. Guidelines for the management of spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage: a guideline
for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2010;41:2108–2129.
Expert peer review of AHA Scientific Statements is conducted at the AHA National Center. For more on AHA statements and guidelines development,
visit http://www.americanheart.org/presenter.jhtml?identifier3023366.
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, enhancement, and/or distribution of this document are not permitted without the express
permission of the American Heart Association. Instructions for obtaining permission are located at http://www.americanheart.org/presenter.jhtml?
identifier4431. A link to the “Permission Request Form” appears on the right side of the page.
© 2010 American Heart Association, Inc.
Stroke is available at http://stroke.ahajournals.org DOI: 10.1161/STR.0b013e3181ec611b
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ 2108 by guest on May 27, 2014
Spontaneous, nontraumatic intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH)
is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality throughout
the world. Although much has been made of the lack of a
specific targeted therapy, much less is written about the success
and goals of aggressive medical and surgical care for this
disease. Recent population-based studies suggest that most
patients present with small ICHs that are readily survivable with
good medical care.1 This suggests that excellent medical care
likely has a potent, direct impact on ICH morbidity and mortality
now, even before a specific therapy is found. Indeed, as
discussed later, the overall aggressiveness of ICH care is directly
related to mortality from this disease.2 One of the purposes of
this guideline, therefore, is to remind clinicians of the importance of their care in determining ICH outcome and to provide
an evidence-based framework for that care.
In order to make this review brief and readily useful to
practicing clinicians, the reader is referred elsewhere for the
details of ICH epidemiology.1,3,4 Similarly, there are many
ongoing clinical studies throughout the world related to this
disease. The reader is encouraged to consider referring
patients to these important efforts, which can be found at
http://www.strokecenter.org/trials/. We will not discuss ongoing studies because we cannot cover them all; the focus of
this statement is on currently available therapies. Finally, a
recent guideline on pediatric stroke was published5 that
obviates the need to repeat the issues of pediatric ICH here.
The last ICH Guidelines were published in 2007,6 and this
current article serves to update those guidelines. As such,
differences from former recommendations are specified in the
current work. The writing group met by phone to determine
subcategories to evaluate. These included emergency diagnosis
and assessment of ICH and its causes; hemostasis, blood
pressure (BP); intracranial pressure (ICP)/fever/glucose/
seizures/hydrocephalus; iron; ICP monitors/tissue oxygenation;
clot removal; intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH); withdrawal of
technological support; prevention of recurrent ICH; nursing
care; rehab/recovery; future considerations. Each subcategory
was led by an author with 1 or 2 additional authors making
contributions. Full MEDLINE searches were done of all
English-language articles regarding relevant human disease
treatment. Drafts of summaries and recommendations were
circulated to the whole writing group for feedback. A conference
call was held to discuss controversial issues. Sections were
revised and merged by the Chair. The resulting draft was sent to
the whole writing group for comment. Comments were incorporated by the Vice Chair and Chair, and the entire committee
was asked to approve the final draft. Changes to the document
were made by the Chair and Vice Chair in response to peer
review, and the document was again sent to the entire writing
group for suggested changes and approval. Recommendations
follow the American Heart Association Stroke Council’s
methods of classifying the level of certainty of the treatment
effect and the class of evidence (Tables 1 and 2). All Class I
recommendations are listed in Table 3.
Emergency Diagnosis and Assessment of ICH
and Its Causes
ICH is a medical emergency. Rapid diagnosis and attentive
management of patients with ICH is crucial because early
deterioration is common in the first few hours after ICH
onset. More than 20% of patients will experience a decrease
in the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of 2 points
between the prehospital emergency medical services assessment and the initial evaluation in the emergency department
(ED).7 Among those patients with prehospital neurological
decline, the GCS score decreases by an average of 6 points
and the mortality rate is 75%. Further, within the first hour
of presentation to a hospital, 15% of patients demonstrate a
decrease in the GCS score of 2 points.8 The risk for early
neurological deterioration and the high rate of poor long-term
outcomes underscores the need for aggressive early
management.
Prehospital Management
The primary objective in the prehospital setting is to provide
ventilatory and cardiovascular support and to transport the patient to
the closest facility prepared to care for patients with acute stroke
(see ED Management section that follows). Secondary priorities for
emergency medical services providers include obtaining a focused
history regarding the timing of symptom onset (or the time the
patient was last normal) and information about medical history,
medication, and drug use. Finally, emergency medical services
providers should provide advance notice to the ED of the impending
arrival of a potential stroke patient so that critical pathways can be
initiated and consulting services can be alerted. Advance notice by
emergency medical services has been demonstrated to significantly
shorten time to computed tomography (CT) scanning in the ED.9
ED Management
It is of the utmost importance that every ED be prepared to
treat patients with ICH or have a plan for rapid transfer to a
tertiary care center. The crucial resources necessary to manage patients with ICH include neurology, neuroradiology,
neurosurgery, and critical care facilities including adequately
trained nurses and physicians. In the ED, appropriate consultative services should be contacted as quickly as possible and
the clinical evaluation should be performed efficiently, with
physicians and nurses working in parallel. Table 4 describes
the integral components of the history, physical examination,
and diagnostic studies that should be obtained in the ED.
For patients with ICH, emergency management may include neurosurgical interventions for hematoma evacuation,
external ventricular drainage or invasive monitoring and
treatment of ICP, BP management, intubation, and reversal of
coagulopathy. Although many centers have critical pathways
developed for the treatment of acute ischemic stroke, few
have protocols for the management of ICH.18 Such pathways
may allow for more efficient, standardized, and integrated
management of critically ill patients with ICH.
Neuroimaging
The abrupt onset of focal neurological symptoms is presumed to
be vascular in origin until proven otherwise. However, it is
impossible to know whether symptoms are due to ischemia or
hemorrhage based on clinical characteristics alone. Vomiting,
systolic BP 220 mm Hg, severe headache, coma or decreased
level of consciousness, and progression over minutes or hours all
suggest ICH, although none of these findings are specific;
Morgenstern et al Intracerebral Hemorrhage Guideline 2109
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on May 27, 2014
neuroimaging is thus mandatory.19 CT and magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) are both reasonable for initial evaluation. CT is
very sensitive for identifying acute hemorrhage and is considered the gold standard; gradient echo and T2*susceptibilityweighted MRI are as sensitive as CT for detection of acute blood
and are more sensitive for identification of prior hemorrhage.20,21
Time, cost, proximity to the ED, patient tolerance, clinical status,
and MRI availability may, however, preclude emergent MRI in
a sizeable proportion of cases.22
The high rate of early neurological deterioration after ICH is
in part related to active bleeding that may proceed for hours after
symptom onset. The earlier time from symptom onset to first
neuroimage, the more likely subsequent neuroimages will
demonstrate hematoma expansion.15,23,24 Among patients
undergoing head CT within 3 hours of ICH onset, 28% to
38% have hematoma expansion of greater than one third on
follow-up CT.8,25 Hematoma expansion is predictive of
clinical deterioration and increased morbidity and mortality.8,10,15,25 As such, identifying patients at risk for hematoma
expansion is an active area of research. CT angiography and
contrast-enhanced CT may identify patients at high risk of
ICH expansion based on the presence of contrast extravasation within the hematoma.26–30 MRI/angiogram/venogram
and CT angiogram/venogram are reasonably sensitive at
identifying secondary causes of hemorrhage, including arteriovenous malformations, tumors, moyamoya, and cerebral
vein thrombosis.31–33 A catheter angiogram may be considered if clinical suspicion is high or noninvasive studies are
suggestive of an underlying vascular cause. Clinical suspicion
of a secondary cause of ICH may include a prodrome of
headache, neurological, or constitutional symptoms. Radiological suspicions of secondary causes of ICH should be
Table 1. Applying Classification of Recommendations and Level of Evidence
*Data available from clinical trials or registries about the usefulness/efficacy in different subpopulations, such as sex, age, history of diabetes, history of prior
myocardial infarction, history of heart failure, and prior aspirin use. A recommendation with Level of Evidence B or C does not imply that the recommendation is weak.
Many important clinical questions addressed in the guidelines do not lend themselves to clinical trials. Even though randomized trials are not available, there may
be a very clear clinical consensus that a particular test or therapy is useful or effective.
†In 2003, the ACCF/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines developed a list of suggested phrases to use when writing recommendations. All guideline
recommendations have been written in full sentences that express a complete thought, such that a recommendation, even if separated and presented apart from
the rest of the document (including headings above sets of recommendations), would still convey the full intent of the recommendation. It is hoped that this will
increase readers’ comprehension of the guidelines and will allow queries at the individual recommendation level.
2110 Stroke September 2010
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on May 27, 2014
invoked by the presence of subarachnoid hemorrhage, unusual (noncircular) hematoma shape, the presence of edema
out of proportion to the early time an ICH is first imaged, an
unusual location for hemorrhage, and the presence of other
abnormal structures in the brain like a mass. An MR or CT
venogram should be performed if hemorrhage location, relative edema volume, or abnormal signal in the cerebral sinuses
on routine neuroimaging suggest cerebral vein thrombosis.
In summary, ICH is a medical emergency, characterized by high
morbidity and mortality, which should be promptly diagnosed and
aggressively managed. Hematoma expansion and early deterioration are common within the first few hours after onset.
Recommendations
1. Rapid neuroimaging with CT or MRI is recommended
to distinguish ischemic stroke from ICH (Class I; Level
of Evidence: A). (Unchanged from the previous guideline)
2. CT angiography and contrast-enhanced CT may be
considered to help identify patients at risk for hematoma expansion (Class IIb; Level of Evidence: B), and
CT angiography, CT venography, contrast-enhanced
CT, contrast-enhanced MRI, magnetic resonance angiography, and magnetic resonance venography can be
useful to evaluate for underlying structural lesions,
including vascular malformations and tumors when
there is clinical or radiological suspicion (Class IIa;
Level of Evidence: B). (New recommendation)
Medical Treatment for ICH
Hemostasis/Antiplatelets/Deep Vein
Thrombosis Prophylaxis
Underlying hemostatic abnormalities can contribute to ICH.
Patients at risk include those on oral anticoagulants (OACs),
those with acquired or congenital coagulation factor deficiencies, and those with qualitative or quantitative platelet abnormalities. Patients undergoing treatment with OACs constitute 12%
to 14% of patients with ICH,34,35 and with increased use of
warfarin, the proportion appears to be increasing.36 Recognition
of an underlying coagulopathy thus provides an opportunity to
target correction in the treatment strategy. For patients with a
coagulation factor deficiency and thrombocytopenia, replacement of the appropriate factor or platelets is indicated.
For patients being treated with OACs who have life-threatening
bleeding, such as intracranial hemorrhage, the general recommendation is to correct the international normalized ratio (INR) as
rapidly as possible.37,38 Infusions of vitamin K and fresh-frozen
plasma (FFP) have historically been recommended, but more
recently, prothrombin complex concentrates (PCCs) and recombinant factor VIIa (rFVIIa) have emerged as potential therapies.
Vitamin K remains an adjunct to more rapidly acting initial
therapy for life-threatening OAC-associated hemorrhage because even when given intravenously, it requires hours to correct
the INR.39–41 The efficacy of FFP is limited by risk of allergic
and infectious transfusion reactions, processing time, and the
volume required for correction. Likelihood of INR correction at
24 hours was linked to time to FFP administration in 1 study,
although 17% of patients still did not have an INR 1.4 at this
time, suggesting that FFP administered in this manner may be
insufficient for rapid correction of coagulopathy.42
PCCs are plasma-derived factor concentrates primarily
used to treat factor IX deficiency. Because PCCs also contain
factors II, VII, and X in addition to IX, they are increasingly
recommended for warfarin reversal. PCCs have the advantages of rapid reconstitution and administration, having high
concentrations of coagulation factors in small volumes, and
processing to inactivate infectious agents. Though different
PCC preparations differ in relative amounts of factors (with
VII the most likely to be low), several studies have shown
that PCCs can rapidly normalize INR (within minutes) in
patients taking OACs (reviewed in43–45). Nonrandomized
retrospective reviews and a small case-control study have
shown more rapid correction of INR with vitamin K and PCC
than vitamin K and FFP, but have not revealed a difference in
clinical outcome.46–48 One randomized trial compared the use
of a PCC (Konyne) to supplement FFP versus FFP alone in
patients with OAC-related ICH, finding that those who
received PCC had significantly shorter time to INR correction
and received less volume of FFP. Although there was no
difference in outcome, those who received FFP also had more
adverse events, primarily attributable to fluid overload.49
Although PCCs may theoretically increase the risk of thrombotic complications, this risk appears relatively low.43 DeTable 2. Definition of Classes and Levels of Evidence Used in
American Heart Association Stroke Council Recommendations
Class I Conditions for which there is evidence for
and/or general agreement that the
procedure or treatment is useful and
effective
Class II Conditions for which there is conflicting
evidence and/or a divergence of
opinion about the usefulness/efficacy
of a procedure or treatment
Class IIa The weight of evidence or opinion is in
favor of the procedure or treatment
Class IIb Usefulness/efficacy is less well
established by evidence or opinion
Class III Conditions for which there is evidence
and/or general agreement that the
procedure or treatment is not
useful/effective and in some cases
may be harmful
Therapeutic recommendations
Level of Evidence A Data derived from multiple randomized
clinical trials or meta-analyses
Level of Evidence B Data derived from a single randomized
trial or nonrandomized studies
Level of Evidence C Consensus opinion of experts, case
studies, or standard of care
Diagnostic recommendations
Level of Evidence A Data derived from multiple prospective
cohort studies using a reference
standard applied by a masked
evaluator
Level of Evidence B Data derived from a single grade A study,
or one or more case-control studies, or
studies using a reference standard
applied by an unmasked evaluator
Level of Evidence C Consensus opinion of experts
Morgenstern et al Intracerebral Hemorrhage Guideline 2111
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on May 27, 2014
spite the lack of large, well-controlled, randomized trials,
PCCs are being increasingly recommended as an option in
guidelines promulgated for warfarin reversal in the setting
of OAC-associated life-threatening or intracranial hemorrhages.37,38,50–52 Table 5 provides a list of several products
for factor replacement in warfarin reversal that are commercially available in the United States at the present time.
rFVIIa, licensed to treat hemophilia patients with high titer
inhibitors or congenital factor VII deficiency, has garnered
attention as a potential treatment for spontaneous and OACassociated ICH. Although rFVIIa can rapidly normalize INR
in the setting of OAC-associated ICH,53–57 it does not
replenish all of the vitamin K–dependent factors and therefore may not restore thrombin generation as well as PCCs.58
In light of the limited data, a recent American Society of
Hematology evidence-based review recommended against
routine use of rFVIIa for warfarin reversal.59
rFVIIa has also been tested in patients with non-OAC ICH.
A phase 2 randomized trial showed that treatment with
rFVIIa within 4 hours after ICH onset limited hematoma
growth and improved clinical outcomes relative to placebo,
though with increased frequency of thromboembolic events
(7% versus 2%).60 A subsequent phase 3 study comparing
placebo with 20 g/kg and 80 g/kg of rFVIIa failed to show
differences in clinical outcome, despite confirming the ability
of both doses to diminish hematoma enlargement.61 Although
overall serious thromboembolic adverse events were similar,
the higher rFVIIa (80 g/kg) group had significantly more
arterial events than the placebo group. The authors noted
imbalances in the treatment groups, particularly the greater
number of patients with IVH in the higher-dose rFVIIa
group.60 It remains to be determined whether rFVIIa will
benefit a particular subset of patients with ICH, but currently
its benefits in ICH patients, whether or not they are undergoing treatment with OACs, remain unproven.
Studies of the effect of prior antiplatelet agent use or
platelet dysfunction on ICH hematoma growth and outcome
have found conflicting results. Reported antiplatelet agent use
was not associated with hematoma expansion or clinical
outcome in the placebo group of an ICH neuroprotective
study.62 However, others have suggested that platelet dysfunction as measured by platelet function assays may be
associated with hematoma expansion and clinical outcome.63,64 The utility and safety of platelet transfusion or
Table 3. Class I Recommendations
Recommendations Class/Level of Evidence
Emergency diagnosis and assessment of ICH and
its causes
Rapid neuroimaging with CT or MRI is recommended to distinguish
ischemic stroke from ICH. (Unchanged from the previous
guideline)
Class I, Level A
Medical treatment for ICH Patients with a severe coagulation factor deficiency or severe
thrombocytopenia should receive appropriate factor replacement
therapy or platelets, respectively. (New recommendation)
Class I, Level C
Hemostasis/antiplatelets/DVT prophylaxis Patients with ICH whose INR is elevated due to OAC should have
their warfarin withheld, receive therapy to replace vitamin
K–dependent factors and correct the INR, and receive
intravenous vitamin K. (Revised from the previous guideline)
Class I, Level C
Patients with ICH should have intermittent pneumatic compression
for prevention of venous thromboembolism in addition to elastic
stockings. (Unchanged from the previous guideline)
Class I, Level B
Inpatient management and prevention of
secondary brain injury
General monitoring Initial monitoring and management of ICH patients should take
place in an intensive care unit, preferably one with physician
and nursing neuroscience intensive care expertise. (Unchanged
from the previous guideline)
Class I, Level B
Management of glucose Glucose should be monitored and normoglycemia is recommended Class I, Level C
Seizures and antiepileptic drugs Patients with clinical seizures should be treated with antiepileptic
drugs. (Revised from previous guideline)
Patients with a change in mental status who are found to have
electrographic seizures on EEG should be treated with
antiepileptic drugs
Class I, Level A
Class I, Level C
Procedures/surgery—clot removal Patients with cerebellar hemorrhage who are deteriorating
neurologically or who have brainstem compression and/or
hydrocephalus from ventricular obstruction should undergo
surgical removal of the hemorrhage as soon as possible.
(Revised from the previous guideline)
Class I, Level B
Prevention of recurrent ICH After the acute ICH, absent medical contraindications, BP should
be well controlled, particularly for patients with ICH location
typical of hypertensive vasculopathy. (New recommendation)
Class I, Level A
CT indicates computed tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; DVT, deep vein thrombosis; INR, international normalized ratio; OAC, oral anticoagulants;
and EEG, electroencephalogram.
2112 Stroke September 2010
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on May 27, 2014
other agents in patients with a normal platelet count, but use
of antiplatelet agents or platelet dysfunction, is not known.
Patients with ICH have a high risk of thromboembolic
disease.65 Women and African Americans appear to be at greater
risk.65–67 Intermittent pneumatic compression combined with
elastic stockings has been shown by a randomized trial to be
superior to elastic stockings alone in reducing occurrence of
asymptomatic deep vein thrombosis after ICH (4.7% versus
15.9%).68 Graduated compression stockings alone are ineffective in preventing deep vein thrombosis.69 Less clear, however, is
the role of adding anticoagulation to pneumatic compression. Two
small randomized studies found no difference in deep vein thrombosis incidence, and no increase in bleeding, in patients given lowdose subcutaneous heparin initiated at day 4 or at day 10 after
ICH.70,71 An uncontrolled study of treatment initiated on day 2
found a reduction in thromboembolic disease without increased
rebleeding.70
Recommendations
1. Patients with a severe coagulation factor deficiency or
severe thrombocytopenia should receive appropriate factor replacement therapy or platelets, respectively (Class I;
Level of Evidence: C). (New recommendation)
2. Patients with ICH whose INR is elevated due to OACs
should have their warfarin withheld, receive therapy to
replace vitamin K–dependent factors and correct the
INR, and receive intravenous vitamin K (Class I; Level
of Evidence: C). PCCs have not shown improved
outcome compared with FFP but may have fewer
complications compared with FFP and are reasonable
to consider as an alternative to FFP (Class IIa; Level of
Evidence: B). rFVIIa does not replace all clotting
factors, and although the INR may be lowered, clotting
may not be restored in vivo; therefore, rFVIIa is not
routinely recommended as a sole agent for OAC reversal in ICH (Class III; Level of Evidence: C). (Revised
from the previous guideline).
3. Although rFVIIa can limit the extent of hematoma
expansion in noncoagulopathic ICH patients, there
Table 4. Integral Components of the History, Physical
Examination, and Work-Up of the Patient With ICH in the ED
Comments
History
Time of symptom onset (or
time the patient was last
normal)
Initial symptoms and
progression of symptoms
Vascular risk factors Hypertension, diabetes,
hypercholesterolemia, and smoking
Medications Anticoagulants, antiplatelet agents,
decongestants, antihypertensive
medications, stimulants (including diet
pills), sympathomimetics
Recent trauma or surgery Carotid endarterectomy or carotid stenting
in particular, as ICH may be related to
hyperperfusion after such procedures
Dementia Associated with amyloid angiopathy
Alcohol or illicit drug use Cocaine and other sympathomimetic
drugs are associated with ICH,
stimulants
Seizures
Liver disease May be associated with coagulopathy
Cancer and hematologic
disorders
May be associated with coagulopathy
Physical examination
Vital signs Fever is associated with early neurologic
deterioration10
Higher initial blood pressure is associated
with early neurologic deterioration and
increased mortality11
A general physical
examination focusing on
the head, heart, lungs,
abdomen, and extremities
A thorough but time-urgent
neurologic examination
A structured examination such as the
National Institutes of Health Stroke
Scale can be completed in minutes and
provides a quantification that allows
easy communication of the severity of
the event to other caregivers. GCS
score is similarly well known and
easily computed, and the initial GCS
score is a strong predictor of long-term
outcome.12,13 These can be
supplemented as needed
Serum and urine tests
Complete blood count,
electrolytes, blood urea
nitrogen and creatinine,
and glucose
Higher creatinine is associated with
hematoma expansion. Higher serum
glucose is associated with hematoma
expansion and worse outcome
(although there are no data to suggest
that normalization improves
outcome)11,14
Prothrombin time or INR
and an activated partial
thromboplastin time
Warfarin-related hemorrhages are
associated with an increased
hematoma volume, greater risk of
expansion, and increased morbidity and
mortality15–17
(Continued)
Table 4. Continued
Comments
Toxicology screen in young
or middle-aged patients to
detect cocaine and other
sympathomimetic drugs of
abuse
Cocaine and other sympathomimetic
drugs are associated with ICH
Urinalysis and urine culture
and a pregnancy test in a
woman of childbearing age
Other routine tests
ECG To assess for active coronary ischemia or
prior cardiac injury that may indicate
poor cardiac function and to obtain a
baseline in the event of
cardiopulmonary issues during
hospitalization
Chest radiograph
Neuroimaging As described in the text
GCS indicates Glasgow Coma Scale; ECG, electrocardiogram.
Morgenstern et al Intracerebral Hemorrhage Guideline 2113
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on May 27, 2014
is an increase in thromboembolic risk with rFVIIa
and no clear clinical benefit in unselected patients.
Thus rFVIIa is not recommended in unselected
patients. (Class III; Level of Evidence: A). (New
recommendation) Further research to determine
whether any selected group of patients may benefit
from this therapy is needed before any recommendation for its use can be made.
4. The usefulness of platelet transfusions in ICH patients with a history of antiplatelet use is unclear and
is considered investigational (Class IIb; Level of
Evidence: B). (New recommendation)
Table 5. Products Commercially Available in the United States for Coagulation Factor Replacement
Product Factor(s)
Dose (Consultation With a Hematologist
Is Recommended for Specific Dosing) Uses
Fresh-frozen plasma I (fibrinogen), II, V, VII, IX, X, XI,
XIII, antithrombin
10 –15 mL/kg with ideal recovery
would raise factor levels 15%–20%
OAC reversal
Consumptive coagulopathy
Hepatic dysfunction
Cryoprecipitate I, VIII, XIII, vWF 1–2 U/10 kg Hypo/a-fibrinogenemia
Lack of factor-specific products for
factor VIII deficiency or vWD
Factor XIII deficiency
Prothrombin complex
concentrates
II, IX, X (small amounts of VII) Assayed in factor IX activity Factor IX deficiency (hemophilia B)
Bebulin VH (Baxter), Profilnine
SD (Grifols)
Both Bebulin and Profilnine are
3-factor PCCs that have
approximately 1/10th the factor VII
activity relative to factor IX activity.
The amounts of factor II and X
relative to IX is variable, but for
Bebulin XIIIX and for Profilnine
IIXIX
Dosing for factor IX deficiency—
1 U/kg raises activity by 1%
Dosing for OAC reversal has not been
well established
OAC reversal (not FDA-approved)
NovoSeven RT (Novo Nordisk) Recombinant activated VII Higher risk of thromboembolic
complications with higher doses
For hemophilia A or B patients with
inhibitors, 90 g/kg every 2 h
For factor VII–deficient patients, 15–30
g/kg every 4–6 h
Factor VIII or IX deficiency with inhibitors
to factor VIII or IX
Congenital factor VII deficiency
Not recommended for spontaneous ICH
or OAC reversal
Factor VIII concentrates
Plasma-derived
Alphanate (Grifols)*†
Humate-P (CSL-Behring)*†
Koate-DVI (Bayer)*
Wilate (Octapharma)*†
Immunoaffinity purified
Hemofil-M (Baxter)
Monarc-M (Baxter)
Monoclate-P (CSL-Behring)
Recombinant
Advate (Baxter)
Helixate FS (CSL-Behring)
Kogenate FS (Bayer)
Recombinate (Baxter)
Xyntha (Wyeth)
VIII Each factor VIII unit/kg raises the
serum factor VIII level by 2%
(typically, a 50-U/kg dose is used to
raise the factor VIII level to 100%)
Factor VIII deficiency (hemophilia A)
Wilate is not indicated for hemophilia A.
Factor IX concentrates
Plasma-derived
AlphaNine SD (Grifols)
Mononine (Baxter)
Recombinant
BeneFix (Wyeth)
IX Each Factor IX unit/kg raises the
serum level by 1% (typically, a
100-U/kg dose is used to raise the
level to 100%)
Factor IX deficiency (hemophilia B)
One unit of BeneFix raises the serum
level by 0.83%, so 120 U/kg raises
the activity to 100%.
vWD indicates von Willebrand disease; FDA, US Food and Drug Administration; and PCCs, prothrombin complex concentrates.
*Also contains von Willebrand factor.
†Indicated for von Willebrand disease (dose by ristocetin cofactor units; ratio of fVIII to ristocetin cofactor unit varies by product).
2114 Stroke September 2010
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on May 27, 2014
5. Patients with ICH should have intermittent pneumatic compression for prevention of venous thromboembolism in addition to elastic stockings (Class I;
Level of Evidence: B). (Unchanged from the previous
guideline)
6. After documentation of cessation of bleeding, lowdose subcutaneous low-molecular-weight heparin or
unfractionated heparin may be considered for prevention of venous thromboembolism in patients with
lack of mobility after 1 to 4 days from onset (Class
IIb; Level of Evidence: B). (Revised from the previous
guideline)
Blood Pressure
Blood Pressure and Outcome in ICH
Blood pressure (BP) is frequently, and often markedly,
elevated in patients with acute ICH; these elevations in BP
are greater than that seen in patients with ischemic stroke.72,73
Although BP generally falls spontaneously within several
days after ICH, high BP persists in a substantial proportion of
patients.72,73 Potential pathophysiologic mechanisms include
stress activation of the neuroendocrine system (sympathetic
nervous system, renin-angiotensin axis, or glucocorticoid system) and increased intracranial pressure. Hypertension theoretically could contribute to hydrostatic expansion of the hematoma,
peri-hematoma edema, and rebleeding, all of which may contribute to adverse outcomes in ICH, although a clear association
between hypertension within the first few hours after ICH and
the risk of hematoma expansion (or eventual hematoma volume)
has not been clearly demonstrated.25,74
A systematic review75 and a recent large multisite study in
China73 show that a measurement of systolic BP above 140 to
150 mm Hg within 12 hours of ICH is associated with more
than double the risk of subsequent death or dependency.
Compared with ischemic stroke, where consistent U- or
J-shaped associations between BP levels and poor outcome
have been shown,76 only 1 study of ICH has shown a poor
outcome at very low systolic BP levels (140 mm Hg).77 For
both ischemic stroke and possibly ICH, a likely explanation
for such association is reverse causation, whereby very low
BP levels occur disproportionately in more severe cases, so
that although low BP levels may be associated with a high
case fatality, it may not in itself be causal.
Effects of BP-Lowering Treatments
The strong observational data cited previously and sophisticated neuroimaging studies that fail to identify an ischemic
penumbra in ICH78 formed the basis for the INTensive Blood
Pressure Reduction in Acute Cerebral Hemorrhage Trial
(INTERACT) pilot study, published in 2008.79 INTERACT
was an open-label, randomized, controlled trial undertaken in
404 mainly Chinese patients who could be assessed, treated,
and monitored within 6 hours of the onset of ICH; 203 were
randomized to a treatment with locally available intravenous
BP-lowering agents to target a low systolic BP goal of
140 mm Hg within 1 hour and maintained for at least the next
24 hours, and 201 were randomized to a more modest systolic
BP target of 180 mm Hg, as recommended in an earlier AHA
guideline.80 The study showed a trend toward lower relative
and absolute growth in hematoma volumes from baseline to
24 hours in the intensive treatment group compared with the
control group. In addition, there was no excess of neurological deterioration or other adverse events related to intensive
BP lowering, nor were there any differences across several
measures of clinical outcome, including disability and quality
of life between groups, although the trial was not powered to
detect such outcomes. The study provides an important proof
of concept for early BP lowering in patients with ICH, but the
data are insufficient to recommend a definitive policy. Another study, the Antihypertensive Treatment in Acute Cerebral Hemorrhage (ATACH) trial,81 also confirms the feasibility and safety of early rapid BP lowering in ICH.82 This
study used a 4-tier, dose escalation of intravenous
nicardipine-based BP lowering in 80 patients with ICH.
Thus, advances have been made in our knowledge of the
mechanisms of ICH and the safety of early BP lowering since
the publication of the 2007 American Heart Association ICH
guidelines. INTERACT and ATACH now represent the best
available evidence to help guide decisions about BP lowering
in ICH. Although these studies have shown that intensive BP
lowering is clinically feasible and potentially safe, the BP
pressure target, duration of therapy, and whether such treatment improves clinical outcomes remain unclear.
Recommendations
1. Until ongoing clinical trials of BP intervention for
ICH are completed, physicians must manage BP on
the basis of the present incomplete efficacy evidence.
Current suggested recommendations for target BP
in various situations are listed in Table 6 and may be
considered (Class IIb; Level of Evidence: C). (Unchanged from the previous guideline)
2. In patients presenting with a systolic BP of 150 to
220 mm Hg, acute lowering of systolic BP to
140 mm Hg is probably safe (Class IIa; Level of
Evidence: B). (New recommendation)
Inpatient Management and Prevention of
Secondary Brain Injury
General Monitoring
Patients with ICH are frequently medically and neurologically unstable, particularly within the first few days after
Table 6. Suggested Recommended Guidelines for Treating
Elevated BP in Spontaneous ICH
1. If SBP is 200 mm Hg or MAP is 150 mm Hg, then consider
aggressive reduction of BP with continuous intravenous infusion, with
frequent BP monitoring every 5 min.
2. If SBP is 180 mm Hg or MAP is 130 mm Hg and there is the
possibility of elevated ICP, then consider monitoring ICP and reducing BP
using intermittent or continuous intravenous medications while
maintaining a cerebral perfusion pressure 60 mm Hg.
3. If SBP is 180 mm Hg or MAP is 130 mm Hg and there is not
evidence of elevated ICP, then consider a modest reduction of BP (eg,
MAP of 110 mm Hg or target BP of 160/90 mm Hg) using intermittent or
continuous intravenous medications to control BP and clinically
reexamine the patient every 15 min.
Note that these recommendations are Class C. SBP indicates systolic blood
pressure; MAP, mean arterial pressure.
Morgenstern et al Intracerebral Hemorrhage Guideline 2115
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on May 27, 2014
onset. Care of ICH patients in a dedicated neuroscience
intensive care unit is associated with a lower mortality rate.83
Frequent vital sign checks, neurological assessments, and
continuous cardiopulmonary monitoring including a cycled
automated BP cuff, electrocardiographic telemetry, and O2
saturation probe should be standard. Continuous intra-arterial
BP monitoring should be considered in patients receiving
intravenous vasoactive medications.
Nursing Care
The specific nursing care required for ICH patients in
intensive care units may include (1) surveillance and monitoring of ICP, cerebral perfusion pressure and hemodynamic
function; (2) titration and implementation of protocols for
management of ICP, BP, mechanical ventilation, fever, and
serum glucose; and (3) prevention of complications of immobility through positioning, airway maintenance, and mobilization within physiological tolerance. The consensus document from the Brain Attack Coalition on comprehensive
stroke centers delineates these as specific areas of monitoring
and complication prevention in which nurses should be
trained. This document also recommends that nurses be
trained in detailed assessment of neurological function including standardized scales such as the National Institutes of
Health Stroke Scale, GCS, and the Glasgow Outcome Scale.
In a Canadian study of 49 hospitals that included ICH
patients, a higher proportion of registered nurses and better
nurse–physician communications were independently associated with lower 30-day mortality even after adjusting for
disease severity, comorbidities, and hospital characteristics.84
Recommendation
1. Initial monitoring and management of ICH patients
should take place in an intensive care unit with
physician and nursing neuroscience intensive care
expertise (Class I; Level of Evidence: B). (Unchanged
from the previous guideline)
Management of Glucose
High blood glucose on admission predicts an increased risk of
mortality and poor outcome in patients with and without diabetes
and ICH.85–87 A randomized trial showing improved outcomes
with tight glucose control (range 80 to 110 mg/dL) using insulin
infusions in mainly surgical critical care patients88 has increased
the use of this therapy. However, more recent studies have
demonstrated increased incidence of systemic and cerebral
hypoglycemic events and possibly even increased risk of mortality in patients treated with this regimen.89–92 At present the
optimal management of hyperglycemia in ICH and the target
glucose remains to be clarified. Hypoglycemia should be avoided.
Temperature Management
Fever worsens outcome in experimental models of brain injury.93,94 The incidence of fever after basal ganglionic and lobar
ICH is high, especially in patients with IVH. In patients
surviving the first 72 hours after hospital admission, the duration
of fever is related to outcome and appears to be an independent
prognostic factor in these patients.95 These data provide a
rationale for aggressive treatment to maintain normothermia in
patients with ICH; however, there are no data linking fever
treatment with outcome. Similarly, therapeutic cooling has not
been systematically investigated in ICH patients.
Seizures and Antiepileptic Drugs
The incidence of clinical seizures within the first 2 weeks after
ICH has been reported to range from 2.7% to 17%, with the
majority occurring at or near onset.96–100 Studies of continuous
electroencephalography (EEG) have reported electrographic seizures in 28% to 31% of select cohorts of ICH patients, despite
most having received prophylactic anticonvulsants.101,102 In a
large, single-center study, prophylactic antiepileptic drugs did
significantly reduce the number of clinical seizures after lobar
ICH.98 However, in prospective and population-based
studies, clinical seizures have not been associated with
worsened neurological outcome or mortality.97,103,104 The
clinical impact of subclinical seizures detected on EEG is also
not clear. A recent analysis from the placebo arm of an ICH
neuroprotectant study found that patients who received antiepileptic drugs (primarily phenytoin) without a documented
seizure were significantly more likely to be dead or disabled
at 90 days, after adjusting for other established predictors of
ICH outcome.105 Another recent single-center observational
study had similar findings, specifically for phenytoin.106 Thus
only clinical seizures or electrographic seizures in patients
with a change in mental status should be treated with
antiepileptic drugs. Continuous EEG monitoring should be
considered in ICH patients with depressed mental status out
of proportion to the degree of brain injury. The utility of
prophylactic anticonvulsant medication remains uncertain.
Recommendations
Management of Glucose
1. Glucose should be monitored and normoglycemia is
recommended (Class I: Level of Evidence: C). (New
recommendation)
Seizures and Antiepileptic Drugs
1. Clinical seizures should be treated with antiepileptic
drugs (Class I; Level of Evidence: A). (Revised from
the previous guideline) Continuous EEG monitoring
is probably indicated in ICH patients with depressed
mental status out of proportion to the degree of
brain injury (Class IIa; Level of Evidence: B). Patients with a change in mental status who are found
to have electrographic seizures on EEG should be
treated with antiepileptic drugs (Class I; Level of
Evidence: C). Prophylactic anticonvulsant medication should not be used (Class III; Level of Evidence:
B). (New recommendation)
Iron
Systemic treatment with the iron chelator deferoxamine
ameliorates ICH-induced changes in markers of DNA damage, attenuates brain edema, and improves functional recovery in rat models of ICH.107–111 A few studies have examined
the role of iron in ICH patients and reported that high serum
ferritin levels are associated with poor outcome after ICH112
and correlate with the perihematoma edema volume.113,114
Limiting iron-mediated toxicity is a promising therapeutic
target in ICH. Besides chelating iron, deferoxamine exhibits
other neuroprotective properties.115 It induces transcription of
2116 Stroke September 2010
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on May 27, 2014
heme oxygenase-1 and inhibits hemoglobin-mediated glutamate
excitotoxicity and hypoxia inducible factor prolyl hydroxylases.116–119 Further studies in this area are warranted, but no
current therapeutic recommendation can be made at present.
Procedures/Surgery
ICP Monitoring and Treatment
ICP monitoring is often performed in patients with ICH.
However, only very limited published data exist regarding the
frequency of elevated ICP and its management in patients
with ICH.120,121 There is evidence for differential pressure
gradients in at least some cases so that ICP may be elevated
in and around the hematoma but not distant from it.122
Because the usual causes of elevated ICP are hydrocephalus
from IVH or mass effect from the hematoma (or surrounding
edema), patients with small hematomas and limited IVH
usually will not require treatment to lower ICP.
ICP is measured using devices inserted into the brain
parenchyma, typically at the bedside. Fiberoptic technology
can be used in both types of devices. A ventricular catheter
(VC) inserted into the lateral ventricle allows for drainage of
cerebrospinal fluid, which can help reduce ICP in patients
with hydrocephalus. A parenchymal catheter ICP device is
inserted into the brain parenchyma and allows for monitoring
of ICP, but not cerebrospinal fluid drainage. The absence of
published studies showing that management of elevated ICP
impacts on ICH outcome makes the decision whether to
monitor and treat elevated ICP unclear. Risks associated with
ICP monitor insertion and use include infection and intracranial hemorrhage. In general, the risk of hemorrhage or
infection is thought to be higher with VC than with parenchymal catheters, although data on these rates are not derived
from patients with ICH, but rather principally from those with
traumatic brain injury or aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage. In a 1997 series of 108 intraparenchymal devices, the
rate of infection was 2.9% and the rate of intracranial
hemorrhage was 2.1% (15.3% in patients with coagulopathies).123 A direct comparison of the complications associated
with each type of monitoring device was reported in a 1993 to
1997 series of 536 intracerebral monitoring devices (274 VCs,
229 intraparenchymal parenchymal catheters, and 33 other types
of devices) in which the overall rate of infection was 4% and the
overall rate of intracranial hemorrhage was 3%.124 Before
insertion of a monitoring device, the patient’s coagulation status
should be evaluated. Prior use of antiplatelet agents may justify
platelet transfusion before the procedure, and the use of warfarin
may require reversal of coagulopathy before placement. The
decision to use a VC or a parenchymal catheter device should be
based on the specific need to drain cerebrospinal fluid in patients
with hydrocephalus or trapped ventricle and the balance of
monitoring risks with the unknown utility of ICP management in
patients with ICH.
ICP treatment should be directed at the underlying cause,
especially if due to hydrocephalus or mass effect from the
hematoma. Because of limited data regarding ICP in ICH,
management principles for elevated ICP are borrowed from
Figure. Intracranial pressure treatment
algorithm. CPP indicates cerebral perfusion pressure; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid.
Adapted from Brain Trauma Foundation
Head Injury Guidelines.126 Copyright
2000, Brain Trauma Foundation.
Morgenstern et al Intracerebral Hemorrhage Guideline 2117
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on May 27, 2014
traumatic brain injury guidelines, which emphasize maintaining
a cerebral perfusion pressure of 50 to 70 mm Hg, depending on
the status of cerebral autoregulation125,126 (see Figure). ICH
patients with a GCS score of 8, those with clinical evidence of
transtentorial herniation, or those with significant IVH or hydrocephalus may be considered for ICP monitoring and treatment.
Numerous studies have assessed ventricular size and effects
of enlargement on ICH outcome.127–130 Among 902 patients
with follow-up data randomized into the international Surgical
Trial of Intracerebral Hemorrhage (STICH) trial of early hematoma evacuation, 377 had IVH and 208 of these had hydrocephalus (23% of all patients, 55% of those with IVH).131 Hydrocephalus predicted poor outcome in this study, as well as other
previous studies.127 Thus, hydrocephalus is an important cause
of ICH-related morbidity and mortality,1 and treatment should
be considered in patients with decreased level of consciousness.
Small case series have described the use of brain tissue
oxygen and cerebral microdialysis monitoring in patients
with ICH.132,133 Because of the small numbers of patients and
limited data, no recommendation can be made regarding the
use of these technologies at this time.
Recommendations
1. Patients with a GCS score of <8, those with clinical
evidence of transtentorial herniation, or those with
significant IVH or hydrocephalus might be considered for ICP monitoring and treatment. A cerebral
perfusion pressure of 50 to 70 mm Hg may be
reasonable to maintain depending on the status of
cerebral autoregulation (Class IIb; Level of Evidence: C). (New recommendation)
2. Ventricular drainage as treatment for hydrocephalus is reasonable in patients with decreased level of
consciousness (Class IIa; Level of Evidence: B). (New
recommendation)
Intraventricular Hemorrhage
IVH occurs in 45% of patients with spontaneous ICH.134 IVH
can be primary (confined to the ventricles) or secondary
(originating as an extension of an ICH). Most IVHs are
secondary and are related to hypertensive hemorrhages involving the basal ganglia and the thalamus.134,135
Although inserting a VC should theoretically aid in drainage
of blood and cerebrospinal fluid from the ventricles, VC use
alone may be ineffective because of difficulty maintaining
catheter patency and the slow removal of intraventricular
blood.136 Thus there has been recent interest in the use of
thrombolytic agents as adjuncts to VC use in the setting of IVH.
Animal studies and clinical series reported that intraventricular administration of fibrinolytic agents, including urokinase,
streptokinase, and recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator, in IVH may reduce morbidity and mortality by accelerating
blood clearance and clot lysis.137–142 Recently the Clot Lysis:
Evaluating Accelerated Resolution of IVH (CLEAR-IVH) Trial
prospectively evaluated the safety of open-label doses of intraventricular recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator in 52
IVH patients. Symptomatic bleeding occurred in 4% and bacterial ventriculitis in 2%, and the 30-day mortality rate was
17%.143 The efficacy of this treatment requires confirmation
before its use can be recommended outside of a clinical trial.
Some reports suggest alternative procedures for IVH such
as endoscopic surgical evacuation and ventriculostomy,144–146
ventriculoperitoneal shunting,147 or lumbar drainage for hydrocephalus.148 Few data exist to support these strategies.
Recommendation
1. Although intraventricular administration of recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator in IVH
appears to have a fairly low complication rate,
efficacy and safety of this treatment is uncertain and
is considered investigational (Class IIb; Level of
Evidence: B). (New recommendation)
Clot Removal
Surgical Treatment of ICH
The decision about whether and when to surgically remove
ICH remains controversial. The pathophysiology of brain
injury surrounding the hematoma is due to the mechanical
effects of the growing mass of blood as well as the subsequent
toxic effects of blood in the surrounding brain tissue. Early
surgery to limit the mechanical compression of brain and the
toxic effects of blood may limit injury, but the surgical risks
in a patient with ongoing bleeding may be greater. In
addition, operative removal of hemorrhage by craniotomy in
all but the most superficial hemorrhages involves cutting
through uninjured brain. Among the limitations of ICH surgical
trials is that young and middle-aged patients at risk of herniation
from large ICHs were unlikely to be randomized for treatment.
Recommendations for these patients are uncertain.
Craniotomy by Location of ICH
Most but not all149 of the randomized trials of surgery for ICH
excluded patients with cerebellar ICH, which comprises 10% to
15% of cases. Previous versions of these guidelines6 cited
nonrandomized studies showing that patients with cerebellar
ICH larger than 3 cm in diameter or those with brainstem
compression or hydrocephalus had good outcomes with surgery
to remove the hematoma, whereas similar patients managed
medically did poorly.150–155 If the hemorrhage is 3 cm in
diameter and there is no brainstem compression or hydrocephalus, reasonable outcomes may be achieved without surgery.
Even though randomized trials of cerebellar hematoma evacuation have not been undertaken, the differences in outcome in the
earlier studies are such that clinical equipoise does not exist for
a trial. Furthermore, the use of a VC alone instead of immediate
cerebellar hematoma evacuation is generally considered insufficient and is not recommended, especially in patients with
compressed cisterns.155
The STICH trial found that patients with hematomas extending to within 1 cm of the cortical surface had a trend toward
more favorable outcome with surgery within 96 hours, although
this finding did not reach statistical significance (odds ratio,
0.69; 95% confidence interval, 0.47 to 1.01).156 Patients with
lobar hemorrhages and a GCS score of 9 to 12 also had a trend
toward better outcome. Because the benefit of surgery for
patients with superficial ICH was not statistically significant
after adjusting for multiple testing, the authors recommended
additional clinical trials to confirm this benefit.157
2118 Stroke September 2010
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on May 27, 2014
By contrast, patients in the STICH study with an ICH 1
cm from the cortical surface or with a GCS score of 8
tended to do worse with surgical removal as compared with
medical management. Another study randomized 108 patients
with supratentorial subcortical or putaminal ICH 30 mL in
volume to craniotomy or medical management within 8 hours of
onset.158 Good outcome (good recovery or moderate disability
on the Glasgow Outcome Scale at 1 year) was significantly
better in those treated with surgery, but there was no difference
in overall survival. Other randomized trials have had too few
patients to determine outcomes in subgroups by location, randomized only patients with deep ICH, or did not report these
results.159–161 Enthusiasm for surgical evacuation of thalamic
and pontine ICH has been limited.154,162,163
Minimally Invasive Surgical Removal of ICH
If the indications for surgical evacuation of intracerebral
hematomas are controversial, the means by which to achieve
this evacuation are even less well established. Several groups
have developed minimally invasive clot removal techniques.
These techniques tend to make use of stereotactic guidance
combined with either thrombolytic-enhanced or endoscopicenhanced aspiration. Both randomized trials of thrombolyticenhanced aspiration for subcortical ICH149,161,164 and
endoscopic-enhanced aspiration165–167 with or without stereotaxis have reported increased clot removal and decreased mortality in those subjects treated surgically
within 12 to 72 hours, but improved functional outcome
has not been consistently demonstrated.
Timing of Surgery
One key issue has been the lack of consensus on the time frame
of what constitutes early surgery. Clinical studies have reported
a wide variability in the timing of surgery, ranging from within
4 hours up to 96 hours from the onset of symptoms to time of
operation.156,158,161,168 Such time variance among the studies has
made direct comparison and analysis of the impact of surgical
timing difficult. A retrospective Japanese series of surgical
removal of 100 putaminal ICHs within 7 hours of onset (60
within 3 hours) reported better than expected outcomes.169
However, subsequent randomized trials that treated subjects
within 12 hours of onset reported mixed results.158,161,168 An
increased risk of rebleeding was noted in the small trial of
subjects randomized within 4 hours of onset.170
Trials that randomized patients within 24 hours,171 48
hours,159,165 72 hours,149,160 and 96 hours156 have also demonstrated no clear benefit for surgery as compared with initial
medical management except for improved outcome in the
subgroup of patients in the STICH trial with superficial ICH and
decreased mortality in those patients with subcortical hemorrhages treated with minimally invasive methods within 12 to 72
hours, as noted above.
Recommendations
1. For most patients with ICH, the usefulness of surgery is uncertain (Class IIb; Level of Evidence: C).
(New recommendation) Specific exceptions to this
recommendation follow
2. Patients with cerebellar hemorrhage who are deteriorating neurologically or who have brainstem compression
and/or hydrocephalus from ventricular obstruction
should undergo surgical removal of the hemorrhage as
soon as possible (Class I; Level of Evidence: B). (Revised
from the previous guideline) Initial treatment of these
patients with ventricular drainage alone rather than
surgical evacuation is not recommended (Class III; Level
of Evidence: C). (New recommendation)
3. For patients presenting with lobar clots >30 mL and
within 1 cm of the surface, evacuation of supratentorial ICH by standard craniotomy might be considered (Class IIb; Level of Evidence: B). (Revised from
the previous guideline)
4. The effectiveness of minimally invasive clot evacuation utilizing either stereotactic or endoscopic aspiration with or without thrombolytic usage is uncertain and is considered investigational (Class IIb;
Level of Evidence: B). (New recommendation)
5. Although theoretically attractive, no clear evidence at
present indicates that ultra-early removal of supratentorial ICH improves functional outcome or mortality
rate. Very early craniotomy may be harmful due to
increased risk of recurrent bleeding (Class III; Level of
Evidence: B). (Revised from the previous guideline)
Outcome Prediction and Withdrawal of
Technological Support
Many observational and epidemiological studies have identified a
wide range of factors that are predictive of outcome after acute ICH.
From these studies numerous outcome prediction models have been
developed for mortality and functional outcome. Features found in
most of these prediction models include individual patient characteristics such as the score on the GCS or National Institutes of
Health Stroke Scale, age, hematoma volume and location, and the
presence and amount of IVH.12,172–180 No outcome prediction
model for ICH, however, has considered the impact of care
limitations such as do not resuscitate (DNR) orders or withdrawal of
technological support.
Most patients that die from ICH do so during the initial acute
hospitalization, and these deaths usually occur in the setting of
withdrawal of support due to presumed poor prognosis.181,182
Several studies, however, have now identified withdrawal of
medical support and other early care limitations, such as DNR
orders within the first day of hospitalization, as independent
outcome predictors.2,183,184 It is likely that current outcome
prediction models as well as more informal methods of early
prognostication after ICH are biased by the failure to account for
these care limitations. Concern has been raised that decisions by
physicians to limit care early after ICH are resulting in selffulfilling prophecies of poor outcome due to inaccurately pessimistic prognostication and failure to provide initial aggressive
therapy in severely ill ICH patients who nonetheless still have
the possibility of favorable outcome.
Although a DNR order by definition means that no attempt
at resuscitation should be made in the event that a cardiopulmonary arrest occurs, in practical use, when administered
early after ICH, it is a proxy for overall lack of aggressiveness of care.2 This implies that the overall aggressiveness of ICH care at a hospital may be critically important
in determining patients’ outcome, irrespective of specific
individual characteristics.2,83,185
Morgenstern et al Intracerebral Hemorrhage Guideline 2119
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on May 27, 2014
Although prognostication early after ICH may be desired
by physicians, patients, and families, it is currently based on
uncertain ground. Given this uncertainty and the potential for
self-fulfilling prophecies of poor outcome, great caution
should be undertaken in attempting precise prognostication
early after ICH, especially if the purpose is to consider
withdrawal of support or DNR orders.186 Thus, aggressive
guideline-concordant therapy is recommended for all ICH
patients who do not have advanced directives specifying that
this should not be undertaken. Care limitations such as DNR
orders or withdrawal of support should not be recommended
by treating physicians during the first few days after ICH.
Recommendation
1. Aggressive full care early after ICH onset and
postponement of new DNR orders until at least the
second full day of hospitalization is probably recommended (Class IIa; Level of Evidence: B). Patients
with preexisting DNR orders are not included in this
recommendation. Current methods of prognostication in individual patients early after ICH are likely
biased by failure to account for the influence of
withdrawal of support and early DNR orders. Patients who are given DNR status at any point should
receive all other appropriate medical and surgical
interventions unless otherwise explicitly indicated.
(Revised from the previous guideline)
Prevention of Recurrent ICH
Population-based studies of survivors of a first hemorrhagic
stroke have identified rates of recurrent ICH of 2.1% to 3.7%
per patient-year,187,188 substantially higher than these individuals’ rate of subsequent ischemic stroke.
The most consistently identified risk factor for recurrent ICH
is lobar location of the initial ICH.187,189 This finding likely
represents the association of cerebral amyloid angiopathy with
lobar location and increased recurrence.190,191 Hemorrhage in
locations characteristic of hypertensive vasculopathy, such as
basal ganglia, thalamus, or brainstem,192 also recur, but less
frequently. Other factors linked to ICH recurrence in some
studies include older age,188 post-ICH anticoagulation,188 previous hemorrhage before the presenting ICH,191 carriership of the
apolipoprotein E 2 or 4 alleles,191,193 and greater number of
microbleeds on T2*-weighted gradient-echo MRI.194
Hypertension is the most important currently modifiable risk
factor for prevention of ICH recurrence.195,196 The importance of
BP control was supported by data from the Perindopril Protection Against Recurrent Stroke Study (PROGRESS) showing that
subjects with cerebrovascular disease randomized to perindopril
plus optional indapamide had significantly lower risk of first
ICH (adjusted hazard ratio, 0.44; 95% confidence interval, 0.28
to 0.69) and a similar, though statistically insignificant, reduction
in recurrent ICH (adjusted hazard ratio, 0.37; 95% confidence
interval, 0.10 to 1.38).193 Notably, this reduction appeared to
apply to lobar as well as deep hemispheric ICH. Although
specific data on the optimal BP for reducing ICH recurrence are
not available, a reasonable target is a BP 140/90 (or 130/80
in the presence of diabetes or chronic kidney disease) as
suggested by the most recent report from the Joint National
Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment
of High Blood Pressure.197
Oral anticoagulation is associated with worse ICH outcome198,199 and increased risk of recurrence,188 raising the
question of whether the benefits of anticoagulation for preventing thromboembolism outweigh its risks after initial ICH. For a
hypothetical 69-year-old man with nonvalvular atrial fibrillation
and prior lobar ICH, Markov modeling predicted that long-term
anticoagulation would shorten quality-adjusted survival because
of the high risk of recurrence after lobar ICH.200 The results for
anticoagulation after deep hemispheric ICH were less clear-cut
and varied depending on assumptions about risk of future
thromboembolism or ICH. The effects of antiplatelet agents on
ICH recurrence and severity appear to be substantially smaller
than for anticoagulation,16,62,189,201 suggesting that antiplatelet
treatment may be a safer alternative to anticoagulation after ICH.
Recently, the ACTIVE A (Atrial Fibrillation Clopidogrel Trial
with Irbesartan for Prevention of Vascular Events–Aspirin)
study reported on a randomized, double-blind study of the safety
and efficacy of adding clopidogrel 75 mg daily to aspirin 75 to
100 mg daily in patients with high-risk atrial fibrillation and a
contraindication to warfarin. Although previous ICH was listed
as one of the many reasons for study entry, the authors did not report
the proportion of subjects with previous ICH, and therefore the
study results may not directly apply to those with previous ICH.
Subjects who received clopidogrel added to aspirin had a 0.8% per
year absolute risk reduction of major vascular events at the cost of
0.7% per year increase in major bleeding events.202
The recent Stroke Prevention with Aggressive Reductions in
Cholesterol Levels (SPARCL) study found increased risk of
subsequent ICH (unadjusted hazard ratio, 1.68; 95% confidence
interval, 1.09 to 2.59) among subjects with prior stroke randomized to high-dose atorvastatin.203 It remains unclear whether this
effect outweighs the benefits of statin treatment in reducing ischemic cardiac and cerebral events in ICH survivors. Frequent alcohol
use (defined in the Greater Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky study as
2 drinks per day) has been linked to increased ICH risk204 and is
therefore reasonable to avoid after ICH. Other behaviors, such as
physical exertion, sexual activity, or stress, have not been linked to
ICH,205 though little systematic data have been reported.
Recommendations
1. In situations where stratifying a patient’s risk of
recurrent ICH may affect other management decisions, it is reasonable to consider the following risk
factors for recurrence: lobar location of the initial
ICH, older age, ongoing anticoagulation, presence of
the apolipoprotein E 2 or 4 alleles, and greater
number of microbleeds on MRI (Class IIa; Level of
Evidence: B). (New recommendation)
2. After the acute ICH period, absent medical contraindications, BP should be well controlled, particularly for patients with ICH location typical of hypertensive vasculopathy (Class I; Level of Evidence: A).
(New recommendation)
3. After the acute ICH period, a goal target of a normal
BP of <140/90 (<130/80 if diabetes or chronic
kidney disease) is reasonable (Class IIa; Level of
Evidence: B). (New recommendation)
2120 Stroke September 2010
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on May 27, 2014
4. Avoidance of long-term anticoagulation as treatment
for nonvalvular atrial fibrillation is probably recommended after spontaneous lobar ICH because of the
relatively high risk of recurrence (Class IIa; Level of
Evidence: B). Anticoagulation after nonlobar ICH
and antiplatelet therapy after all ICH might be
considered, particularly when there are definite indications for these agents (Class IIb; Level of Evidence: B). (Unchanged from the previous guideline)
5. Avoidance of heavy alcohol use can be beneficial
(Class IIa; Level of Evidence: B). There is insufficient
data to recommend restrictions on use of statin
agents or physical or sexual activity (Class IIb; Level
of Evidence: C). (New recommendation)
Rehabilitation and Recovery
Knowledge of differences in the natural history of recovery
patterns and prognosis for residual disability and functioning
between ICH and ischemic stroke is complicated by the
disproportionately lower rate of ICH compared with ischemic
stroke and the lumping of subarachnoid hemorrhage and ICH
together in many studies. There are also problems associated
with the insensitivity of many of the outcome measures used in
rehabilitation to allow detection of clinically meaningful differences between groups. Even so, there is some evidence that
patients with ICH make slightly greater and faster gains in
recovery206–208 compared with patients with ischemic stroke.
In general, recovery is more rapid in the first few weeks but
may continue for many months after ICH,208,209 with approximately half of all survivors remaining dependent on others for
activities of daily living.176 However, patients vary in their speed
and degree of recovery, and there is no hard rule regarding when
recovery is over. Cognition, mood, motivation, and social
support all influence recovery, and it is difficult to separate
intrinsic from adaptive recovery. A simple prognostic score
utilizing age, ICH volume and location, level of consciousness at
admission, and pre-ICH cognitive impairment has been shown
to predict independence at 90 days.176 Given that ICH is often
located in lobar regions and complicated by intraventricular
extension, some patients with specific cognitive deficits or
delayed recovery that is disproportionate to the size of the lesion
may require specialized therapy in rehabilitation.
The provision of stroke rehabilitation services has received
considerable attention in recent years. In part this represents a
need to tailor services to ensure optimal recovery for patients and
in part is due to fiscal pressures on costly health services. Given
strong evidence for the benefits of well-organized, multidisciplinary inpatient (stroke unit) care in terms of improved survival,
recovery, and returning home compared with conventional
nondedicated stroke wards,210 efforts have been made to extend
this service model of coordinated care into the community.
Specifically, early supported hospital discharge and home-based
rehabilitation programs have been shown to be cost-effective,210
whereas home-based therapy in stable patients has been shown
to produce comparable outcomes to conventional outpatient
rehabilitation.211 The success of these programs depends on
caregiver training and support. However, the likely configuration of stroke rehabilitation services in any region will depend on
available resources and funding options. A key portion of
rehabilitation should include education for the patient and
caregiver regarding secondary stroke prevention and means to
achieve rehabilitation goals. Rehabilitation programs should
consider lifestyle changes, depression, and caregiver burden as
important issues to work on with the patient and caregivers.
Recommendations
1. Given the potentially serious nature and complex pattern of evolving disability, it is reasonable that all
patients with ICH have access to multidisciplinary
rehabilitation (Class IIa; Level of Evidence: B). Where
possible, rehabilitation can be beneficial when begun as
early as possible and continued in the community as
part of a well-coordinated (seamless) program of accelerated hospital discharge and home-based resettlement to promote ongoing recovery (Class IIa; Level of
Evidence: B). (New recommendation)
Future Considerations
The future of ICH treatment centers on a cluster of targets.
The first is clearly prevention. Community-based projects to
reduce BP through healthy lifestyles and medication adherence are likely to be quite successful in reducing ICH
incidence.212 Animal studies aimed at preventing cerebral
amyloid angiopathy show early promise.213,214
Once an ICH has occurred, efforts to mobilize communities to
facilitate prompt treatment are similar to efforts aimed at acute
ischemic stroke treatment.215 Advanced imaging currently may
identify patients with ongoing bleeding and provides a target for
improved patient selection for testing of hemostatic agents.28
Hemostatic agents’ efficacy must be clearly weighed against
potential arterial and venous thrombotic risk.
BP control theoretically may reduce hematoma growth
and/or reduce cerebral edema. Early studies suggest that a
randomized controlled BP-lowering study is feasible.79,81
Safety and efficacy remain to be shown in larger studies.
There is active research on interfering with oxidative injury
after ICH. Iron-chelating agents such as deferoxamine are being
studied in early-phase trials.107,115 Pathways that center around
hypoxia-inducible factors and prolyl hydroxylases offer other
potential targets for intervention centered around oxidative
stress.216 The role of microglia and macrophages in hematoma
resolution is getting more attention.217 Autophagy may be a cellular
process that could be altered to prevent ICH-related cell death.218
There are probably many factors that contribute to injury after
ICH, including mass effect, toxicity related to blood, and
displacement of underlying tissue. Seemingly, a simple solution
is hematoma removal. To date, however, surgery has not proved
to be the panacea for this condition. New efforts utilizing
minimally invasive surgical techniques that may remove blood’s
toxic and pressure effects while avoiding the damage caused by
more invasive procedures, as well as new treatments to dissolve and
drain intraventricular blood, are currently being studied.143,164
Priorities for ICH research have been published and reviewed
extensively.13 An aggressive, collaborative approach to both
basic and clinical research in this field is likely to promote the
highest yield. In the mean time, it is clear that our ability to
prognosticate about ICH is limited,184 and that aggressive care
now, and hope for the future, are both clearly indicated.
Morgenstern et al Intracerebral Hemorrhage Guideline 2121
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on May 27, 2014
Disclosures
Writing Group Disclosures
Writing Group
Member Employment Research Grant
Other Research
Support
Speakers’
Bureau/Honoraria
Expert
Witness
Ownership
Interest
Consultant/Advisory
Board Other
Lewis B.
Morgenstern
University of
Michigan
NIH (R01 NS057127)
Consultant—Safety and
Tolerability of
Deferoxamine in Acute
Cerebral Hemorrhage
(generic study drug)*;
NINDS (U01 NS052510)
Co-I (Deferoxamine
therapy for
intracerebral
hemorrhage—animal
translational grant
examining generic
deferoxamine in ICH)†;
NIH (R01 NS38916)
PI—Brain Attack
Surveillance in Corpus
Christi (observational
study of stroke in a
biethnic community)†
None None None None None Medical adjudication
board member
Wyeth*
Craig Anderson George Institute,
Sydney,
Australia
The Australian National
Health & Medical
Research Council
(employer); Senior
Principal Research
Fellowship (632918);
Program Grant
(571281); Project Grant
(INTERACT 2
study—512402) †;
NINDS (IMSIII Trial 1
V01 NSO52220-02;
subaward SRS#19449
SAP-G100121-
1005817)†; FIA
(RO1NS39512 R-01-NS
36695)†
None Boehringer-Ingelheim*;
Servier*;
Sanofi-Aventis*
None None Boehringer-Ingelheim* None
Kyra Becker University of
Washington
None None None None None None None
Joseph P.
Broderick
University of
Cincinnati
NINDS R-01 NS36695
(Genetic and
Environmental Risk
Factors for Hemorrhagic
Stroke—CoInvestigator)†;
NIH/NINDS (P50
SPOTRIAS
NS44283—PI of PPG)†
Novo
NordisksuppliesFactor VIIa for
NINDS-funded
STOP-IT trial*
None None None None None
E. Sander
Connolly, Jr
Columbia
University
None None None None None None None
Steven M.
Greenberg
Massachusetts
General Hospital
NIH (R01 NS057127,
Consultant)—Safety
and Tolerability of
Deferoxamine in Acute
Cerebral Hemorrhage
(generic study drug)†
None None None None None None
J. Claude
Hemphill III
University of
California at San
Francisco
NIH/NINDS; U10
NS058931 (PI)†;
(SF-NET: San Francisco
Neurological
Emergencies Trials
Network—national
network for phase III
clinical trials—no
current ICH trials); Novo
Nordisk (PI)†
None None None None Novo Nordisk* None
(Continued)
2122 Stroke September 2010
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on May 27, 2014
Writing Group Disclosures Continued
Writing Group
Member Employment Research Grant
Other Research
Support
Speakers’
Bureau/Honoraria
Expert
Witness
Ownership
Interest
Consultant/Advisory
Board Other
James N.
Huang
University of
California at San
Francisco
None Prospective
Advate ITI
Registry (PAIR)
Study sponsored
by Baxter (Local
PI—UCSF)*
None None None None None
R. Loch
Macdonald
University of
Toronto
Physicians Services,
Inc. Foundation Grant
for study of
subarachnoid
hemorrhage†
None None None Edge
Therapeutics*
Actelion
Pharmaceuticals (study
of subarachnoid
hemorrhage)*
None
Steven R.
Messé
University of
Pennsylvania
None None Boehringer-Ingelheim* None None None None
Pamela H.
Mitchell
University of
Washington
None None None None None None None
Magdy Selim Beth Israel NIH (R01
NS057127)—Safety
and Tolerability of
Deferoxamine in Acute
Cerebral Hemorrhage
(generic study drug)†
None None None None None None
Rafael J.
Tamargo
Johns Hopkins
University
None None None None None None None
This table represents the relationships of writing group members that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the
Disclosure Questionnaire, which all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person
receives $10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share
of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” under the
preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
Reviewer Disclosures
Reviewer Employment Research Grant
Other
Research
Support
Speakers’
Bureau/Honoraria
Expert
Witness
Ownership
Interest
Consultant/Advisory
Board Other
Tamilyn Bakas Indiana University
Purdue University
Indianapolis
None None None None None None None
John Cole University of
Maryland
None None None None None None None
Matthew
Flaherty
University of
Cincinnati
Academic Health
Center
None None None None None None None
Karen C.
Johnston
University of
Virginia
NIH-NINDS R01 NS050192 -
GRASP trial†
None Multiple grand rounds,
national talks on
stroke*
None None Diffussion Pharmaceuticals,
Inc.*; Remedy
Pharmaceuticals, Inc.*
AAN as associate
editor of neurology
through July
2009†
Christina
Stewart-Amidei
University of
Central Florida
None None None None None None None
Greg Zipfel Washington
University
None None None None None None None
This table represents the relationships of reviewers that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the Disclosure
Questionnaire, which all reviewers are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives $10 000 or more
during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns
$10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
Morgenstern et al Intracerebral Hemorrhage Guideline 2123
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on May 27, 2014
References
1. Zahuranec DB, Gonzales NR, Brown DL, Lisabeth LD, Longwell PJ,
Eden SV, Smith MA, Garcia NM, Hoff JT, Morgenstern LB. Presentation of intracerebral haemorrhage in a community. J Neurol Neurosurg
Psychiatry. 2006;77:340–344.
2. Hemphill JC 3rd, Newman J, Zhao S, Johnston SC. Hospital usage of
early do-not-resuscitate orders and outcome after intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 2004;35:1130–1134.
3. Flaherty ML, Woo D, Haverbusch M, Sekar P, Khoury J, Sauerbeck L,
Moomaw CJ, Schneider A, Kissela B, Kleindorfer D, Broderick JP.
Racial variations in location and risk of intracerebral hemorrhage.
Stroke. 2005;36:934–937.
4. Sacco S, Marini C, Toni D, Olivieri L, Carolei A. Incidence and 10-year
survival of intracerebral hemorrhage in a population-based registry.
Stroke. 2009;40:394–399.
5. Roach ES, Golomb MR, Adams R, Biller J, Daniels S, Deveber G,
Ferriero D, Jones BV, Kirkham FJ, Scott RM, Smith ER. Management
of stroke in infants and children: a scientific statement from a Special
Writing Group of the American Heart Association Stroke Council and
the Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young. Stroke. 2008;39:
2644–2691.
6. Broderick J, Connolly S, Feldmann E, Hanley D, Kase C, Krieger D,
Mayberg M, Morgenstern L, Ogilvy CS, Vespa P, Zuccarello M.
Guidelines for the management of spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage in adults: 2007 update: a guideline from the American Heart
Association/American Stroke Association Stroke Council, High Blood
Pressure Research Council, and the Quality of Care and Outcomes in
Research Interdisciplinary Working Group. Stroke. 2007;38:2001–2023.
7. Moon JS, Janjua N, Ahmed S, Kirmani JF, Harris-Lane P, Jacob M,
Ezzeddine MA, Qureshi AI. Prehospital neurologic deterioration in
patients with intracerebral hemorrhage. Crit Care Med. 2008;36:
172–175.
8. Brott T, Broderick J, Kothari R, Barsan W, Tomsick T, Sauerbeck L,
Spilker J, Duldner J, Khoury J. Early hemorrhage growth in patients
with intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 1997;28:1–5.
9. Abdullah AR, Smith EE, Biddinger PD, Kalenderian D, Schwamm LH.
Advance hospital notification by EMS in acute stroke is associated with
shorter door-to-computed tomography time and increased likelihood of
administration of tissue-plasminogen activator. Prehosp Emerg Care.
2008;12:426–431.
10. Leira R, Da´valos A, Silva Y, Gil-Peralta A, Tejada J, Garcia M, Castillo
J; Stroke Project, Cerebrovascular Diseases Group of the Spanish Neurological Society. Early neurologic deterioration in intracerebral hemorrhage: predictors and associated factors. Neurology. 2004;63:
461–467.
11. Tetri S, Juvela S, Saloheimo P, Pyhtinen J, Hillbom M. Hypertension
and diabetes as predictors of early death after spontaneous intracerebral
hemorrhage. J Neurosurg. 2009;110:411–417.
12. Hemphill JC 3rd, Bonovich DC, Besmertis L, Manley GT, Johnston SC.
The ICH score: a simple, reliable grading scale for intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 2001;32:891–897.
13. NINDS ICH Workshop Participants. Priorities for clinical research in
intracerebral hemorrhage: report from a National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke workshop. Stroke. 2005;36:e23–e41.
14. Broderick JP, Diringer MN, Hill MD, Brun NC, Mayer SA, Steiner T,
Skolnick BE, Davis SM; Recombinant Activated Factor VII Intracerebral Hemorrhage Trial Investigators. Determinants of intracerebral hemorrhage growth: an exploratory analysis. Stroke. 2007;38:1072–1075.
15. Cucchiara B, Messe S, Sansing L, Kasner S, Lyden P; CHANT Investigators. Hematoma growth in oral anticoagulant related intracerebral
hemorrhage. Stroke. 2008;39:2993–2996.
16. Flaherty ML, Tao H, Haverbusch M, Sekar P, Kleindorfer D, Kissela B,
Khatri P, Stettler B, Adeoye O, Moomaw CJ, Broderick JP, Woo D.
Warfarin use leads to larger intracerebral hematomas. Neurology. 2008;
71:1084–1089.
17. Zubkov AY, Mandrekar JN, Claassen DO, Manno EM, Wijdicks EF,
Rabinstein AA. Predictors of outcome in warfarin-related intracerebral
hemorrhage. Arch Neurol. 2008;65:1320–1325.
18. Cooper D, Jauch E, Flaherty ML. Critical pathways for the management
of stroke and intracerebral hemorrhage: a survey of US hospitals. Crit
Pathw Cardiol. 2007;6:18–23.
19. Goldstein LB, Simel DL. Is this patient having a stroke? JAMA. 2005;
293:2391–2402.
20. Fiebach JB, Schellinger PD, Gass A, Kucinski T, Siebler M, Villringer
A, Olkers P, Hirsch JG, Heiland S, Wilde P, Jansen O, Ro¨ther J, Hacke
W, Sartor K; Kompetenznetzwerk Schlaganfall B5. Stroke magnetic
resonance imaging is accurate in hyperacute intracerebral hemorrhage: a
multicenter study on the validity of stroke imaging. Stroke. 2004;35:
502–506.
21. Chalela JA, Kidwell CS, Nentwich LM, Luby M, Butman JA, Demchuk
AM, Hill MD, Patronas N, Latour L, Warach S. Magnetic resonance
imaging and computed tomography in emergency assessment of patients
with suspected acute stroke: a prospective comparison. Lancet. 2007;
369:293–298.
22. Singer OC, Sitzer M, du Mesnil de Rochemont R, Neumann-Haefelin T.
Practical limitations of acute stroke MRI due to patient-related
problems. Neurology. 2004;62:1848–1849.
23. Kazui S, Minematsu K, Yamamoto H, Sawada T, Yamaguchi T. Predisposing factors to enlargement of spontaneous intracerebral
hematoma. Stroke. 1997;28:2370–2375.
24. Fujii Y, Takeuchi S, Sasaki O, Minakawa T, Tanaka R. Multivariate
analysis of predictors of hematoma enlargement in spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 1998;29:1160–1166.
25. Davis SM, Broderick J, Hennerici M, Brun NC, Diringer MN, Mayer
SA, Begtrup K, Steiner T; Recombinant Activated Factor VII Intracerebral Hemorrhage Trial Investigators. Hematoma growth is a determinant of mortality and poor outcome after intracerebral hemorrhage.
Neurology. 2006;66:1175–1181.
26. Becker KJ, Baxter AB, Bybee HM, Tirschwell DL, Abouelsaad T,
Cohen WA. Extravasation of radiographic contrast is an independent
predictor of death in primary intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 1999;
30:2025–2032.
27. Goldstein JN, Fazen LE, Snider R, Schwab K, Greenberg SM, Smith
EE, Lev MH, Rosand J. Contrast extravasation on CT angiography
predicts hematoma expansion in intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurology.
2007;68:889–894.
28. Wada R, Aviv RI, Fox AJ, Sahlas DJ, Gladstone DJ, Tomlinson G,
Symons SP. CT angiography “spot sign” predicts hematoma expansion
in acute intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 2007;38:1257–1262.
29. Kim J, Smith A, Hemphill JC 3rd, Smith WS, Lu Y, Dillon WP,
Wintermark M. Contrast extravasation on CT predicts mortality in
primary intracerebral hemorrhage. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2008;29:
520–525.
30. Ederies A, Demchuk A, Chia T, Gladstone DJ, Dowlatshahi D, Bendavit
G, Wong K, Symons SP, Aviv RI. Postcontrast CT extravasation is
associated with hematoma expansion in CTA spot negative patients.
Stroke. 2009;40:1672–1676.
31. Gazzola S, Aviv RI, Gladstone DJ, Mallia G, Li V, Fox AJ, Symons SP.
Vascular and nonvascular mimics of the CT angiography “spot sign” in
patients with secondary intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 2008;39:
1177–1183.
32. Nu¨ssel F, Wegmu¨ller H, Huber P. Comparison of magnetic resonance
angiography, magnetic resonance imaging and conventional
angiography in cerebral arteriovenous malformation. Neuroradiology.
1991;33:56–61.
33. Yoon HK, Shin HJ, Lee M, Byun HS, Na DG, Han BK. MR angiography
of moyamoya disease before and after encephaloduroarteriosynangiosis.
AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2000;174:195–200.
34. Rådberg JA, Olsson JE, Rådberg CT. Prognostic parameters in spontaneous intracerebral hematomas with special reference to anticoagulant
treatment. Stroke. 1991;22:571–576.
35. Nilsson OG, Lindgren A, Ståhl N, Brandt L, Sa¨veland H. Incidence of
intracerebral and subarachnoid haemorrhage in southern Sweden.
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2000;69:601–607.
36. Flaherty ML, Kissela B, Woo D, Kleindorfer D, Alwell K, Sekar P,
Moomaw CJ, Haverbusch M, Broderick JP. The increasing incidence of
anticoagulant-associated intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurology. 2007;68:
116–121.
37. Ansell J, Hirsh J, Hylek E, Jacobson A, Crowther M, Palareti G;
American College of Chest Physicians. Pharmacology and management
of the vitamin K antagonists: American College of Chest Physicians
Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines (8th Edition). Chest. 2008;
133(suppl):160S–198S.
38. Hanley JP. Warfarin reversal. J Clin Pathol. 2004;57:1132–1139.
39. Hung A, Singh S, Tait RC. A prospective randomized study to determine
the optimal dose of intravenous vitamin K in reversal of overwarfarinization. Br J Haematol. 2000;109:537–539.
40. Lubetsky A, Yonath H, Olchovsky D, Loebstein R, Halkin H, Ezra D.
Comparison of oral vs intravenous phytonadione (vitamin K1) in
2124 Stroke September 2010
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on May 27, 2014
patients with excessive anticoagulation: a prospective randomized controlled study. Arch Intern Med. 2003;163:2469–2473.
41. Watson HG, Baglin T, Laidlaw SL, Makris M, Preston FE. A comparison of the efficacy and rate of response to oral and intravenous
Vitamin K in reversal of over-anticoagulation with warfarin. Br J
Haematol. 2001;115:145–149.
42. Goldstein JN, Thomas SH, Frontiero V, Joseph A, Engel C, Snider R,
Smith EE, Greenberg SM, Rosand J. Timing of fresh frozen plasma
administration and rapid correction of coagulopathy in warfarin-related
intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 2006;37:151–155.
43. Leissinger CA, Blatt PM, Hoots WK, Ewenstein B. Role of prothrombin
complex concentrates in reversing warfarin anticoagulation: a review of
the literature. Am J Hematol. 2008;83:137–143.
44. Pabinger I, Brenner B, Kalina U, Knaub S, Nagy A, Ostermann H;
Beriplex P/N Anticoagulation Reversal Study Group. Prothrombin
complex concentrate (Beriplex P/N) for emergency anticoagulation
reversal: a prospective multinational clinical trial. J Thromb Haemost.
2008;6:622–631.
45. Riess HB, Meier-Hellmann A, Motsch J, Elias M, Kursten FW, Dempfle
CE. Prothrombin complex concentrate (Octaplex) in patients requiring
immediate reversal of oral anticoagulation. Thromb Res. 2007;
121:9–16.
46. Fredriksson K, Norrving B, Stro¨mblad LG. Emergency reversal of
anticoagulation after intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 1992;23:
972–977.
47. Cartmill M, Dolan G, Byrne JL, Byrne PO. Prothrombin complex
concentrate for oral anticoagulant reversal in neurosurgical emergencies.
Br J Neurosurg. 2000;14:458–461.
48. Sjo¨blom L, Hårdemark HG, Lindgren A, Norrving B, Fahle´n M, Samuelsson M, Stigendal L, Stockelberg D, Taghavi A, Wallrup L, Wallvik
J. Management and prognostic features of intracerebral hemorrhage
during anticoagulant therapy: a Swedish multicenter study. Stroke. 2001;
32:2567–2574.
49. Boulis NM, Bobek MP, Schmaier A, Hoff JT. Use of factor IX complex
in warfarin-related intracranial hemorrhage. Neurosurgery. 1999;45:
1113–1118.
50. Baglin TP, Keeling DM, Watson HG; British Committee for Standards
in Haematology. Guidelines on oral anticoagulation (warfarin): third
edition: 2005 update. Br J Haematol. 2006;132:277–285.
51. Baker RI, Coughlin PB, Gallus AS, Harper PL, Salem HH, Wood EM;
Warfarin Reversal Consensus Group. Warfarin reversal: consensus
guidelines, on behalf of the Australasian Society of Thromb Haemost.
Med J Aust. 2004;181:492–497.
52. Steiner T, Kaste M, Forsting M, Mendelow D, Kwiecinski H, Szikora I,
Juvela S, Marchel A, Chapot R, Cognard C, Unterberg A, Hacke W.
Recommendations for the management of intracranial haemorrhage: part
I: spontaneous intracerebral haemorrhage: the European Stroke Initiative
Writing Committee and the Writing Committee for the EUSI Executive
Committee. Cerebrovasc Dis. 2006;22:294–316.
53. Lin J, Hanigan WC, Tarantino M, Wang J. The use of recombinant
activated factor VII to reverse warfarin-induced anticoagulation in
patients with hemorrhages in the central nervous system: preliminary
findings. J Neurosurg. 2003;98:737–740.
54. Veshchev I, Elran H, Salame K. Recombinant coagulation factor VIIa
for rapid preoperative correction of warfarin-related coagulopathy in
patients with acute subdural hematoma. Med Sci Monit. 2002;8:
CS98–CS100.
55. Sørensen B, Johansen P, Nielsen GL, Sørensen JC, Ingerslev J. Reversal
of the International Normalized Ratio with recombinant activated factor
VII in central nervous system bleeding during warfarin thromboprophylaxis: clinical and biochemical aspects. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis.
2003;14:469–477.
56. Freeman WD, Brott TG, Barrett KM, Castillo PR, Deen HG Jr,
Czervionke LF, Meschia JF. Recombinant factor VIIa for rapid reversal
of warfarin anticoagulation in acute intracranial hemorrhage. Mayo Clin
Proc. 2004;79:1495–1500.
57. Ilyas C, Beyer GM, Dutton RP, Scalea TM, Hess JR. Recombinant
factor VIIa for warfarin-associated intracranial bleeding. J Clin Anesth.
2008;20:276–279.
58. Tanaka KA, Szlam F, Dickneite G, Levy JH. Effects of prothrombin
complex concentrate and recombinant activated factor VII on vitamin K
antagonist induced anticoagulation. Thromb Res. 2008;122:117–123.
59. Rosovsky RP, Crowther MA. What Is the Evidence for the Off-label Use
of Recombinant Factor VIIa (rFVIIa) in the Acute Reversal of Warfarin?
Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2008:36–38.
60. Mayer SA, Brun NC, Begtrup K, Broderick J, Davis S, Diringer MN,
Skolnick BE, Steiner T; Recombinant Activated Factor VII Intracerebral
Hemorrhage Trial Investigators. Recombinant activated factor VII for
acute intracerebral hemorrhage. N Engl J Med. 2005;352:777–785.
61. Mayer SA, Brun NC, Begtrup K, Broderick J, Davis S, Diringer MN,
Skolnick BE, Steiner T; FAST Trial Investigators. Efficacy and safety of
recombinant activated factor VII for acute intracerebral hemorrhage.
N Engl J Med. 2008;358:2127–2137.
62. Sansing LH, Messe SR, Cucchiara BL, Cohen SN, Lyden PD, Kasner
SE; CHANT Investigators. Prior antiplatelet use does not affect hemorrhage growth or outcome after ICH. Neurology. 2009;72:1397–1402.
63. Naidech AM, Jovanovic B, Liebling S, Garg RK, Bassin SL, Bendok
BR, Bernstein RA, Alberts MJ, Batjer HH. Reduced platelet activity is
associated with early clot growth and worse 3-month outcome after
intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 2009;40:2398–2401.
64. Naidech AM, Bernstein RA, Levasseur K, Bassin SL, Bendok BR,
Batjer HH, Bleck TP, Alberts MJ. Platelet activity and outcome after
intracerebral hemorrhage. Ann Neurol. 2009;65:352–356.
65. Gregory PC, Kuhlemeier KV. Prevalence of venous thromboembolism
in acute hemorrhagic and thromboembolic stroke. Am J Phys Med
Rehabil. 2003;82:364–369.
66. Kawase K, Okazaki S, Toyoda K, Toratani N, Yoshimura S, Kawano H,
Nagatsuka K, Matsuo H, Naritomi H, Minematsu K. Sex difference in
the prevalence of deep-vein thrombosis in Japanese patients with acute
intracerebral hemorrhage. Cerebrovasc Dis. 2009;27:313–319.
67. Christensen MC, Dawson J, Vincent C. Risk of thromboembolic complications after intracerebral hemorrhage according to ethnicity. Adv
Ther. 2008;25:831–841.
68. Lacut K, Bressollette L, Le Gal G, Etienne E, De Tinteniac A, Renault
A, Rouhart F, Besson G, Garcia JF, Mottier D, Oger E; VICTORIAh
(Venous Intermittent Compression and Thrombosis Occurrence Related
to Intra-cerebral Acute hemorrhage) Investigators. Prevention of venous
thrombosis in patients with acute intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurology.
2005;65:865–869.
69. CLOTS Trials Collaboration, Dennis M, Sandercock PA, Reid J,
Graham C, Murray G, Venables G, Rudd A, Bowler G. Effectiveness of
thigh-length graduated compression stockings to reduce the risk of deep
vein thrombosis after stroke (CLOTS trial 1): a multicentre, randomised
controlled trial. Lancet. 2009;373:1958–1965.
70. Boeer A, Voth E, Henze T, Prange HW. Early heparin therapy
in patients with spontaneous intracerebral haemorrhage. J Neurol
Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1991;54:466–467.
71. Dickmann U, Voth E, Schicha H, Henze T, Prange H, Emrich D.
Heparin therapy, deep-vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism after
intracerebral hemorrhage. Klin Wochenschr. 1988;66:1182–1183.
72. Qureshi AI, Ezzeddine MA, Nasar A, Suri MF, Kirmani JF, Hussein
HM, Divani AA, Reddi AS. Prevalence of elevated blood pressure in
563,704 adult patients with stroke presenting to the ED in the United
States. Am J Emerg Med. 2007;25:32–38.
73. Zhang Y, Reilly KH, Tong W, Xu T, Chen J, Bazzano LA, Qiao D, Ju
Z, Chen CS, He J. Blood pressure and clinical outcome among patients
with acute stroke in Inner Mongolia, China. J Hypertens. 2008;26:
1446–1452.
74. Jauch EC, Lindsell CJ, Adeoye O, Khoury J, Barsan W, Broderick J,
Pancioli A, Brott T. Lack of evidence for an association between
hemodynamic variables and hematoma growth in spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 2006;37:2061–2065.
75. Willmot M, Leonardi-Bee J, Bath PM. High blood pressure in acute
stroke and subsequent outcome: a systematic review. Hypertension.
2004;43:18–24.
76. Leonardi-Bee J, Bath PM, Phillips SJ, Sandercock PA; IST Collaborative Group. Blood pressure and clinical outcomes in the International
Stroke Trial. Stroke. 2002;33:1315–1320.
77. Vemmos KN, Tsivgoulis G, Spengos K, Zakopoulos N, Synetos A,
Manios E, Konstantopoulou P, Mavrikakis M. U-shaped relationship
between mortality and admission blood pressure in patients with acute
stroke. J Intern Med. 2004;255:257–265.
78. Zazulia AR, Diringer MN, Videen TO, Adams RE, Yundt K, Aiyagari
V, Grubb RL Jr, Powers WJ. Hypoperfusion without ischemia surrounding acute intracerebral hemorrhage. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab.
2001;21:804–810.
79. Anderson CS, Huang Y, Wang JG, Arima H, Neal B, Peng B, Heeley E,
Skulina C, Parsons MW, Kim JS, Tao QL, Li YC, Jiang JD, Tai LW,
Zhang JL, Xu E, Cheng Y, Heritier S, Morgenstern LB, Chalmers J;
INTERACT Investigators. Intensive blood pressure reduction in acute
Morgenstern et al Intracerebral Hemorrhage Guideline 2125
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on May 27, 2014
cerebral haemorrhage trial (INTERACT): a randomised pilot trial.
Lancet Neurol. 2008;7:391–399.
80. Broderick JP, Adams HP Jr, Barsan W, Feinberg W, Feldmann E, Grotta
J, Kase C, Krieger D, Mayberg M, Tilley B, Zabramski JM, Zuccarello
M. Guidelines for the management of spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage: a statement for healthcare professionals from a special writing
group of the Stroke Council, American Heart Association. Stroke. 1999;
30:905–915.
81. Qureshi AI. Antihypertensive Treatment of Acute Cerebral Hemorrhage
(ATACH): rationale and design. Neurocritical Care. 2007;6:56–66.
82. Qureshi A. Antihypertensive treatment of acute cerebral hemorrhage
(ATACH) trial. Presented at the International Stroke Conference, New
Orleans, La, February 20–22, 2008.
83. Diringer MN, Edwards DF. Admission to a neurologic/neurosurgical
intensive care unit is associated with reduced mortality rate after intracerebral hemorrhage. Crit Care Med. 2001;29:635–640.
84. Estabrooks CA, Midodzi WK, Cummings GG, Ricker KL, Giovannetti
P. The impact of hospital nursing characteristics on 30-day mortality.
Nurs Res. 2005;54:74–84.
85. Fogelholm R, Murros K, Rissanen A, Avikainen S. Admission blood
glucose and short term survival in primary intracerebral haemorrhage: a
population based study. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2005;76:
349–353.
86. Kimura K, Iguchi Y, Inoue T, Shibazaki K, Matsumoto N, Kobayashi K,
Yamashita S. Hyperglycemia independently increases the risk of early
death in acute spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage. J Neurol Sci.
2007;255:90–94.
87. Passero S, Ciacci G, Ulivelli M. The influence of diabetes and hyperglycemia on clinical course after intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurology.
2003;61:1351–1356.
88. van den Berghe G, Wouters P, Weekers F, Verwaest C, Bruyninckx F,
Schetz M, Vlasselaers D, Ferdinande P, Lauwers P, Bouillon R.
Intensive insulin therapy in the critically ill patients. N Engl J Med.
2001;345:1359–1367.
89. Oddo M, Schmidt JM, Carrera E, Badjatia N, Connolly ES, Presciutti M,
Ostapkovich ND, Levine JM, Le Roux P, Mayer SA. Impact of tight
glycemic control on cerebral glucose metabolism after severe brain
injury: a microdialysis study. Crit Care Med. 2008;36:3233–3238.
90. Vespa P, Boonyaputthikul R, McArthur DL, Miller C, Etchepare M,
Bergsneider M, Glenn T, Martin N, Hovda D. Intensive insulin therapy
reduces microdialysis glucose values without altering glucose utilization
or improving the lactate/pyruvate ratio after traumatic brain injury. Crit
Care Med. 2006;34:850–856.
91. Vespa PM. Intensive glycemic control in traumatic brain injury: what is
the ideal glucose range? Crit Care. 2008;12:175.
92. NICE-SUGAR Study Investigators, Finfer S, Chittock DR, Su SY, Blair
D, Foster D, Dhingra V, Bellomo R, Cook D, Dodek P, Henderson WR,
He´bert PC, Heritier S, Heyland DK, McArthur C, McDonald E, Mitchell
I, Myburgh JA, Norton R, Potter J, Robinson BG, Ronco JJ. Intensive
versus conventional glucose control in critically ill patients. N Engl
J Med. 2009;360:1283–1297.
93. Michenfelder JD, Milde JH. The relationship among canine brain temperature, metabolism, and function during hypothermia. Anesthesiology.
1991;75:130–136.
94. Takagi K. Body temperature in acute stroke. Stroke. 2002;33:
2154–2155.
95. Schwarz S, Ha¨fner K, Aschoff A, Schwab S. Incidence and prognostic
significance of fever following intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurology.
2000;54:354–361.
96. Berger AR, Lipton RB, Lesser ML, Lantos G, Portenoy RK. Early
seizures following intracerebral hemorrhage: implications for therapy.
Neurology. 1988;38:1363–1365.
97. Bladin CF, Alexandrov AV, Bellavance A, Bornstein N, Chambers B,
Cote´ R, Lebrun L, Pirisi A, Norris JW. Seizures after stroke: a prospective multicenter study. Arch Neurol. 2000;57:1617–1622.
98. Passero S, Rocchi R, Rossi S, Ulivelli M, Vatti G. Seizures after
spontaneous supratentorial intracerebral hemorrhage. Epilepsia. 2002;
43:1175–1180.
99. Sung CY, Chu NS. Epileptic seizures in intracerebral haemorrhage.
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1989;52:1273–1276.
100. Yang TM, Lin WC, Chang WN, Ho JT, Wang HC, Tsai NW, Shih YT,
Lu CH. Predictors and outcome of seizures after spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage. Clinical article. J Neurosurg. 2009;111:87–93.
101. Vespa PM, O’Phelan K, Shah M, Mirabelli J, Starkman S, Kidwell C,
Saver J, Nuwer MR, Frazee JG, McArthur DA, Martin NA. Acute
seizures after intracerebral hemorrhage: a factor in progressive midline
shift and outcome. Neurology. 2003;60:1441–1446.
102. Claassen J, Jette´ N, Chum F, Green R, Schmidt M, Choi H, Jirsch J,
Frontera JA, Connolly ES, Emerson RG, Mayer SA, Hirsch LJ. Electrographic seizures and periodic discharges after intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurology. 2007;69:1356–1365.
103. Andaluz N, Zuccarello M. Recent trends in the treatment of spontaneous
intracerebral hemorrhage: analysis of a nationwide inpatient database.
J Neurosurg. 2009;110:403–410.
104. Szaflarski JP, Rackley AY, Kleindorfer DO, Khoury J, Woo D, Miller
R, Alwell K, Broderick JP, Kissela BM. Incidence of seizures in the
acute phase of stroke: a population-based study. Epilepsia. 2008;49:
974–981.
105. Messe´ SR, Sansing LH, Cucchiara BL, Herman ST, Lyden PD, Kasner
SE; CHANT investigators. Prophylactic antiepileptic drug use is associated with poor outcome following ICH. Neurocrit Care. 2009;11:
38–44.
106. Naidech AM, Garg RK, Liebling S, Levasseur K, Macken MP, Schuele
SU, Batjer HH. Anticonvulsant use and outcomes after intracerebral
hemorrhage. Stroke. 2009;40:3810–3815.
107. Gu Y, Hua Y, Keep RF, Morgenstern LB, Xi G. Deferoxamine reduces
intracerebral hematoma-induced iron accumulation and neuronal death
in piglets. Stroke. 2009;40:2241–2243.
108. Huang FP, Xi G, Keep RF, Hua Y, Nemoianu A, Hoff JT. Brain edema
after experimental intracerebral hemorrhage: role of hemoglobin degradation products. J Neurosurg. 2002;96:287–293.
109. Nakamura T, Keep RF, Hua Y, Schallert T, Hoff JT, Xi G. Deferoxamine-induced attenuation of brain edema and neurological deficits in a
rat model of intracerebral hemorrhage. J Neurosurg. 2004;100:672–678.
110. Okauchi M, Hua Y, Keep RF, Morgenstern LB, Xi G. Effects of
deferoxamine on intracerebral hemorrhage-induced brain injury in aged
rats. Stroke. 2009;40:1858–1863.
111. Wu J, Hua Y, Keep RF, Nakamura T, Hoff JT, Xi G. Iron and ironhandling proteins in the brain after intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke.
2003;34:2964–2969.
112. de la Ossa N, Sobrino T, Silva Y, Trueta J, Girona, Spain Milla M,
Gomis M, Agulla J, Serena J, Castillo J, Da’ valos A. High serum ferritin
levels are associated with poor outcome of patients with spontaneous
intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 2009;40:e105. Abstract P343.
113. Lou M, Lieb K, Selim M. The relationship between hematoma iron
content and perihematoma edema: an MRI study. Cerebrovasc Dis.
2009;27:266–271.
114. Mehdiratta M, Kumar S, Hackney D, Schlaug G, Selim M. Association
between serum ferritin level and perihematoma edema volume in
patients with spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 2008;39:
1165–1170.
115. Selim M. Deferoxamine mesylate: a new hope for intracerebral hemorrhage: from bench to clinical trials. Stroke. 2009;40(suppl):S90–S91.
116. Ratan RR, Siddiq A, Aminova L, Langley B, McConoughey S,
Karpisheva K, Lee HH, Carmichael T, Kornblum H, Coppola G,
Geschwind DH, Hoke A, Smirnova N, Rink C, Roy S, Sen C, Beattie
MS, Hart RP, Grumet M, Sun D, Freeman RS, Semenza GL, Gazaryan
I. Small molecule activation of adaptive gene expression: tilorone or its
analogs are novel potent activators of hypoxia inducible factor-1 that
provide prophylaxis against stroke and spinal cord injury. Ann N Y Acad
Sci. 2008;1147:383–394.
117. Regan RF, Panter SS. Hemoglobin potentiates excitotoxic injury in
cortical cell culture. J Neurotrauma. 1996;13:223–231.
118. Siddiq A, Ayoub IA, Chavez JC, Aminova L, Shah S, LaManna JC,
Patton SM, Connor JR, Cherny RA, Volitakis I, Bush AI, Langsetmo I,
Seeley T, Gunzler V, Ratan RR. Hypoxia-inducible factor prolyl
4-hydroxylase inhibition: a target for neuroprotection in the central
nervous system. J Biol Chem. 2005;280:41732–41743.
119. Zaman K, Ryu H, Hall D, O’Donovan K, Lin KI, Miller MP, Marquis
JC, Baraban JM, Semenza GL, Ratan RR. Protection from oxidative
stress-induced apoptosis in cortical neuronal cultures by iron chelators is
associated with enhanced DNA binding of hypoxia-inducible factor-1
and ATF-1/CREB and increased expression of glycolytic enzymes,
p21(waf1/cip1), and erythropoietin. J Neurosci. 1999;19:9821–9830.
120. Fernandes HM, Siddique S, Banister K, Chambers I, Wooldridge T,
Gregson B, Mendelow AD. Continuous monitoring of ICP and CPP
following ICH and its relationship to clinical, radiological and surgical
parameters. Acta Neurochir Suppl. 2000;76:463–466.
121. Ziai WC, Torbey MT, Naff NJ, Williams MA, Bullock R, Marmarou A,
Tuhrim S, Schmutzhard E, Pfausler B, Hanley DF. Frequency of sus2126 Stroke September 2010
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on May 27, 2014
tained intracranial pressure elevation during treatment of severe intraventricular hemorrhage. Cerebrovasc Dis. 2009;27:403–410.
122. Chambers IR, Banister K, Mendelow AD. Intracranial pressure within a
developing intracerebral haemorrhage. Br J Neurosurg. 2001;15:
140–141.
123. Martı´nez-Man˜as RM, Santamarta D, de Campos JM, Ferrer E. Camino
intracranial pressure monitor: prospective study of accuracy and complications. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2000;69:82–86.
124. Guyot LL, Dowling C, Diaz FG, Michael DB. Cerebral monitoring
devices: analysis of complications. Acta Neurochir Suppl. 1998;71:
47–49.
125. Brain Trauma Foundation; American Association of Neurological Surgeons; Congress of Neurological Surgeons; Joint Section on Neurotrauma and Critical Care, AANS/CNS, Bratton SL, Chestnut RM,
Ghajar J, McConnell Hammond FF, Harris OA, Hartl R, Manley GT,
Nemecek A, Newell DW, Rosenthal G, Schouten J, Shutter L, Timmons
SD, Ullman JS, Videtta W, Wilberger JE, Wright DW. Guidelines for
the management of severe traumatic brain injury. IX. Cerebral perfusion
thresholds. J Neurotrauma. 2007;24(suppl 1):S59–S64.
126. Management and Prognosis of Severe Traumatic Brain Injury. New
York, NY: Brain Trauma Foundation; 2000.
127. Diringer MN, Edwards DF, Zazulia AR. Hydrocephalus: a previously
unrecognized predictor of poor outcome from supratentorial intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 1998;29:1352–1357.
128. Huttner HB, Nagel S, Tognoni E, Köhrmann M, J¨uttler E, Orakcioglu B,
Schellinger PD, Schwab S, Bardutzky J. Intracerebral hemorrhage with
severe ventricular involvement: lumbar drainage for communicating
hydrocephalus. Stroke. 2007;38:183–187.
129. van Gijn J, Hijdra A, Wijdicks EF, Vermeulen M, van Crevel H. Acute
hydrocephalus after aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage. J Neurosurg.
1985;63:355–362.
130. Diringer M, Ladenson PW, Stern BJ, Schleimer J, Hanley DF. Plasma
atrial natriuretic factor and subarachnoid hemorrhage. Stroke. 1988;19:
1119–1124.
131. Bhattathiri PS, Gregson B, Prasad KS, Mendelow AD; STICH Investigators. Intraventricular hemorrhage and hydrocephalus after spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage: results from the STICH trial. Acta
Neurochir Suppl. 2006;96:65–68.
132. Hemphill JC 3rd, Morabito D, Farrant M, Manley GT. Brain tissue
oxygen monitoring in intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurocrit Care. 2005;
3:260–270.
133. Miller CM, Vespa PM, McArthur DL, Hirt D, Etchepare M. Frameless
stereotactic aspiration and thrombolysis of deep intracerebral hemorrhage is associated with reduced levels of extracellular cerebral glutamate and unchanged lactate pyruvate ratios. Neurocrit Care. 2007;6:
22–29.
134. Hallevi H, Albright KC, Aronowski J, Barreto AD, Martin-Schild S, Khaja
AM, Gonzales NR, Illoh K, Noser EA, Grotta JC. Intraventricular hemorrhage: Anatomic relationships and clinical implications. Neurology. 2008;
70:848–852.
135. Engelhard HH, Andrews CO, Slavin KV, Charbel FT. Current management of intraventricular hemorrhage. Surg Neurol. 2003;60:15–21.
136. Huttner HB, K[umlaut]ohrmann M, Berger C, Georgiadis D, Schwab S.
Influence of intraventricular hemorrhage and occlusive hydrocephalus
on the long-term outcome of treated patients with basal ganglia hemorrhage: a case-control study. J Neurosurg. 2006;105:412–417.
137. Fountas KN, Kapsalaki EZ, Parish DC, Smith B, Smisson HF, Johnston
KW, Robinson JS. Intraventricular administration of rt-PA in patients
with intraventricular hemorrhage. South Med J. 2005;98:767–773.
138. Lapointe M, Haines S. Fibrinolytic therapy for intraventricular hemorrhage in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2002:CD003692.
139. Murry KR, Rhoney DH, Coplin WM. Urokinase in the treatment of
intraventricular hemorrhage. Ann Pharmacother. 1998;32:256–258.
140. Naff NJ, Hanley DF, Keyl PM, Tuhrim S, Kraut M, Bederson J, Bullock
R, Mayer SA, Schmutzhard E. Intraventricular thrombolysis speeds
blood clot resolution: results of a pilot, prospective, randomized, doubleblind, controlled trial. Neurosurgery. 2004;54:577–583.
141. Nieuwkamp DJ, de Gans K, Rinkel GJ, Algra A. Treatment and outcome
of severe intraventricular extension in patients with subarachnoid or
intracerebral hemorrhage: a systematic review of the literature. J Neurol.
2000;247:117–121.
142. Pang D, Sclabassi RJ, Horton JA. Lysis of intraventricular blood clot with
urokinase in a canine model: part 3: effects of intraventricular urokinase on
clot lysis and posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus. Neurosurgery. 1986;19:
553–572.
143. Morgan T, Awad I, Keyl P, Lane K, Hanley D. Preliminary report of the
clot lysis evaluating accelerated resolution of intraventricular hemorrhage (CLEAR-IVH) clinical trial. Acta neurochirurgica. 2008;105:
217–220.
144. Horva´th Z, Veto F, Bala´s I, K[umlaut]ove´r F, Do´czi T. Biportal endoscopic removal of a primary intraventricular hematoma: case report.
Minim Invasive Neurosurg. 2000;43:4–8.
145. Longatti PL, Martinuzzi A, Fiorindi A, Maistrello L, Carteri A. Neuroendoscopic management of intraventricular hemorrhage. Stroke. 2004;
35:e35–e38.
146. Yadav YR, Mukerji G, Shenoy R, Basoor A, Jain G, Nelson A. Endoscopic management of hypertensive intraventricular haemorrhage with
obstructive hydrocephalus. BMC Neurol. 2007;7:1.
147. Yilmazlar S, Abas F, Korfali E. Comparison of ventricular drainage in
poor grade patients after intracranial hemorrhage. Neurol Res. 2005;27:
653–656.
148. Huttner HB, Schwab S, Bardutzky J. Lumbar drainage for communicating hydrocephalus after ICH with ventricular hemorrhage. Neurocrit
Care. 2006;5:193–196.
149. Wang WZ, Jiang B, Liu HM, Li D, Lu CZ, Zhao YD, Sander JW.
Minimally invasive craniopuncture therapy vs. conservative treatment
for spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage: results from a randomized
clinical trial in China. Int J Stroke. 2009;4:11–16.
150. Kase C. Cerebellar hemorrhage. In: Kase C, Caplan L, eds. Intracerebral
Hemorrhage. Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann; 1994:425–443.
151. Sypert G, Arpin-Sypert E. Spontaneous posterior fossa hematomas. In:
Kaufman H, ed. Intracerebral Hematomas. New York, NY: Raven
Press;1992:187–196.
152. Da Pian R, Bazzan A, Pasqualin A. Surgical versus medical treatment of
spontaneous posterior fossa haematomas: a cooperative study on 205
cases. Neurol Res. 1984;6:145–151.
153. Kirollos RW, Tyagi AK, Ross SA, van Hille PT, Marks PV. Management of spontaneous cerebellar hematomas: a prospective treatment
protocol. Neurosurgery. 2001;49:1378–1386.
154. Morioka J, Fujii M, Kato S, Fujisawa H, Akimura T, Suzuki M,
Kobayashi S; Japan Standard Stroke Registry Group (JSSR). Surgery for
spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage has greater remedial value than
conservative therapy. Surg Neurol. 2006;65:67–72.
155. van Loon J, Van Calenbergh F, Goffin J, Plets C. Controversies in the
management of spontaneous cerebellar haemorrhage: a consecutive
series of 49 cases and review of the literature. Acta Neurochir (Wien).
1993;122:187–193.
156. Mendelow AD, Gregson BA, Fernandes HM, Murray GD, Teasdale
GM, Hope DT, Karimi A, Shaw MD, Barer DH; STICH investigators.
Early surgery versus initial conservative treatment in patients with
spontaneous supratentorial intracerebral haematomas in the International
Surgical Trial in Intracerebral Haemorrhage (STICH): a randomised
trial. Lancet. 2005;365:387–397.
157. Kirkman MA, Mahattanakul W, Gregson BA, Mendelow AD. The effect
of the results of the STICH trial on the management of spontaneous
supratentorial intracerebral haemorrhage in Newcastle. Br J Neurosurg.
2008;22:739–746.
158. Pantazis G, Tsitsopoulos P, Mihas C, Katsiva V, Stavrianos V, Zymaris
S. Early surgical treatment vs conservative management for spontaneous
supratentorial intracerebral hematomas: a prospective randomized study.
Surg Neurol. 2006;66:492–501.
159. Juvela S, Heiskanen O, Poranen A, Valtonen S, Kuurne T, Kaste M,
Troupp H. The treatment of spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage: a
prospective randomized trial of surgical and conservative treatment.
J Neurosurg. 1989;70:755–758.
160. Teernstra OP, Evers SM, Lodder J, Leffers P, Franke CL, Blaauw G;
Multicenter randomized controlled trial (SICHPA). Stereotactic
treatment of intracerebral hematoma by means of a plasminogen activator: a multicenter randomized controlled trial (SICHPA). Stroke.
2003;34:968–974.
161. Zuccarello M, Brott T, Derex L, Kothari R, Sauerbeck L, Tew J, Van
Loveren H, Yeh HS, Tomsick T, Pancioli A, Khoury J, Broderick J.
Early surgical treatment for supratentorial intracerebral hemorrhage: a
randomized feasibility study. Stroke. 1999;30:1833–1839.
162. Kanaya H, Saiki I, Ohuchi T. Hypertensive ICH in Japan: update on
surgical treatment. In: Mizukami M, Kanaya K, Yamori Y, eds.
Hypertensive Intracerebral Hemorrhage. New York, NY: Raven
Press; 1983:147–163.
163. Kanno T, Sano H, Shinomiya Y, Katada K, Nagata J, Hoshino M,
Mitsuyama F. Role of surgery in hypertensive intracerebral
Morgenstern et al Intracerebral Hemorrhage Guideline 2127
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on May 27, 2014
hematoma: a comparative study of 305 nonsurgical and 154 surgical
cases. J Neurosurg. 1984;61:1091–1099.
164. Morgan T, Zuccarello M, Narayan R, Keyl P, Lane K, Hanley D.
Preliminary findings of the minimally-invasive surgery plus rtPA for
intracerebral hemorrhage evacuation (MISTIE) clinical trial. Acta
Neurochir Suppl. 2008;105:147–151.
165. Auer LM, Deinsberger W, Niederkorn K, Gell G, Kleinert R, Schneider
G, Holzer P, Bone G, Mokry M, K[umlaut]orner E, et al. Endoscopic
surgery versus medical treatment for spontaneous intracerebral
hematoma: a randomized study. J Neurosurg. 1989;70:530–535.
166. Cho DY, Chen CC, Chang CS, Lee WY, Tso M. Endoscopic surgery for
spontaneous basal ganglia hemorrhage: comparing endoscopic surgery,
stereotactic aspiration, and craniotomy in noncomatose patients. Surg
Neurol. 2006;65:547–555.
167. Nishihara T, Morita A, Teraoka A, Kirino T. Endoscopy-guided removal
of spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage: comparison with computer
tomography-guided stereotactic evacuation. Childs Nerv Syst. 2007;23:
677–683.
168. Morgenstern LB, Frankowski RF, Shedden P, Pasteur W, Grotta JC.
Surgical treatment for intracerebral hemorrhage (STICH): a singlecenter, randomized clinical trial. Neurology. 1998;51:1359–1363.
169. Kaneko M, Tanaka K, Shimada T, Sato K, Uemura K. Long-term
evaluation of ultra-early operation for hypertensive intracerebral hemorrhage in 100 cases. J Neurosurg. 1983;58:838–842.
170. Morgenstern LB, Demchuk AM, Kim DH, Frankowski RF, Grotta JC.
Rebleeding leads to poor outcome in ultra-early craniotomy for intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurology. 2001;56:1294–1299.
171. Tan SH, Ng PY, Yeo TT, Wong SH, Ong PL, Venketasubramanian N.
Hypertensive basal ganglia hemorrhage: a prospective study comparing
surgical and nonsurgical management. Surg Neurol. 2001;56:287–292.
172. Broderick JP, Brott TG, Duldner JE, Tomsick T, Huster G. Volume of
intracerebral hemorrhage: a powerful and easy-to-use predictor of
30-day mortality. Stroke. 1993;24:987–993.
173. Ariesen MJ, Algra A, van der Worp HB, Rinkel GJ. Applicability and
relevance of models that predict short term outcome after intracerebral
haemorrhage. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2005;76:839–844.
174. Cheung RT, Zou LY. Use of the original, modified, or new intracerebral
hemorrhage score to predict mortality and morbidity after intracerebral
hemorrhage. Stroke. 2003;34:1717–1722.
175. Lisk DR, Pasteur W, Rhoades H, Putnam RD, Grotta JC. Early presentation of hemispheric intracerebral hemorrhage: prediction of outcome
and guidelines for treatment allocation. Neurology. 1994;44:133–139.
176. Rost NS, Smith EE, Chang Y, Snider RW, Chanderraj R, Schwab K,
FitzMaurice E, Wendell L, Goldstein JN, Greenberg SM, Rosand J.
Prediction of functional outcome in patients with primary intracerebral
hemorrhage: the FUNC score. Stroke. 2008;39:2304–2309.
177. Ruiz-Sandoval JL, Chiquete E, Romero-Vargas S, Padilla-Martínez JJ,
Gonza´lez-Cornejo S. Grading scale for prediction of outcome in primary
intracerebral hemorrhages. Stroke. 2007;38:1641–1644.
178. Tuhrim S, Dambrosia JM, Price TR, Mohr JP, Wolf PA, Hier DB, Kase
CS. Intracerebral hemorrhage: external validation and extension of a
model for prediction of 30-day survival. Ann Neurol. 1991;29:658–663.
179. Tuhrim S, Horowitz DR, Sacher M, Godbold JH. Validation and comparison of models predicting survival following intracerebral hemorrhage. Crit Care Med. 1995;23:950–954.
180. Tuhrim S, Horowitz DR, Sacher M, Godbold JH. Volume of ventricular
blood is an important determinant of outcome in supratentorial intracerebral hemorrhage. Crit Care Med. 1999;27:617–621.
181. Naidech AM, Bernstein RA, Bassin SL, Garg RK, Liebling S, Bendok
BR, Batjer HH, Bleck TP. How patients die after intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurocrit Care. 2009;11:45–49.
182. Zurasky JA, Aiyagari V, Zazulia AR, Shackelford A, Diringer MN. Early
mortality following spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurology.
2005;64:725–727.
183. Becker KJ, Baxter AB, Cohen WA, Bybee HM, Tirschwell DL, Newell
DW, Winn HR, Longstreth WT Jr. Withdrawal of support in intracerebral hemorrhage may lead to self-fulfilling prophecies. Neurology. 2001;
56:766–772.
184. Zahuranec DB, Brown DL, Lisabeth LD, Gonzales NR, Longwell PJ,
Smith MA, Garcia NM, Morgenstern LB. Early care limitations independently predict mortality after intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurology.
2007;68:1651–1657.
185. Mirski MA, Chang CW, Cowan R. Impact of a neuroscience intensive
care unit on neurosurgical patient outcomes and cost of care:
evidence-based support for an intensivist-directed specialty ICU model
of care. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol. 2001;13:83–92.
186. Hemphill JC 3rd, White DB. Clinical nihilism in neuroemergencies.
Emerg Med Clin North Am. 2009;27:27–37, vii–viii.
187. Bailey RD, Hart RG, Benavente O, Pearce LA. Recurrent brain hemorrhage is more frequent than ischemic stroke after intracranial hemorrhage. Neurology. 2001;56:773–777.
188. Vermeer SE, Algra A, Franke CL, Koudstaal PJ, Rinkel GJ.
Long-term prognosis after recovery from primary intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurology. 2002;59:205–209.
189. Viswanathan A, Rakich SM, Engel C, Snider R, Rosand J, Greenberg
SM, Smith EE. Antiplatelet use after intracerebral hemorrhage.
Neurology. 2006;66:206–209.
190. Vinters HV. Cerebral amyloid angiopathy: a critical review. Stroke.
1987;18:311–324.
191. O’Donnell HC, Rosand J, Knudsen KA, Furie KL, Segal AZ, Chiu RI,
Ikeda D, Greenberg SM. Apolipoprotein E genotype and the risk of
recurrent lobar intracerebral hemorrhage. N Engl J Med. 2000;342:
240–245.
192. Fisher CM. Pathological observations in hypertensive cerebral hemorrhage. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 1971;30:536–550.
193. Tzourio C, Arima H, Harrap S, Anderson C, Godin O, Woodward M,
Neal B, Bousser MG, Chalmers J, Cambien F, MacMahon S. APOE
genotype, ethnicity, and the risk of cerebral hemorrhage. Neurology.
2008;70:1322–1328.
194. Greenberg SM, Eng JA, Ning M, Smith EE, Rosand J. Hemorrhage
burden predicts recurrent intracerebral hemorrhage after lobar hemorrhage. Stroke. 2004;35:1415–1420.
195. Passero S, Burgalassi L, D’Andrea P, Battistini N. Recurrence of
bleeding in patients with primary intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke.
1995;26:1189–1192.
196. Bae H, Jeong D, Doh J, Lee K, Yun I, Byun B. Recurrence of bleeding
in patients with hypertensive intracerebral hemorrhage. Cerebrovasc
Dis. 1999;9:102–108.
197. Chobanian AV, Bakris GL, Black HR, Cushman WC, Green LA, Izzo
JL Jr, Jones DW, Materson BJ, Oparil S, Wright JT Jr, Roccella EJ;
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Joint National Committee on
Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood
Pressure; National High Blood Pressure Education Program Coordinating Committee. The Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee
on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood
Pressure: the JNC 7 report. JAMA. 2003;289:2560–2572.
198. Rosand J, Eckman MH, Knudsen KA, Singer DE, Greenberg SM. The
effect of warfarin and intensity of anticoagulation on outcome of intracerebral hemorrhage. Arch Intern Med. 2004;164:880–884.
199. Flaherty ML, Haverbusch M, Sekar P, Kissela BM, Kleindorfer D,
Moomaw CJ, Broderick JP, Woo D. Location and outcome of
anticoagulant-associated intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurocrit Care.
2006;5:197–201.
200. Eckman MH, Rosand J, Knudsen KA, Singer DE, Greenberg SM. Can
patients be anticoagulated after intracerebral hemorrhage? A decision
analysis. Stroke. 2003;34:1710–1716.
201. Taylor FC, Cohen H, Ebrahim S. Systematic review of long term
anticoagulation or antiplatelet treatment in patients with non-rheumatic
atrial fibrillation. BMJ. 2001;322:321–326.
202. ACTIVE Investigators, Connolly SJ, Pogue J, Hart RG, Hohnloser SH,
Pfeffer M, Chrolavicius S, Yusuf S. Effect of clopidogrel added to aspirin
in patients with atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2009;360:2066–2078.
203. Goldstein LB, Amarenco P, Szarek M, Callahan A 3rd, Hennerici M,
Sillesen H, Zivin JA, Welch KM; SPARCL Investigators. Hemorrhagic
stroke in the Stroke Prevention by Aggressive Reduction in Cholesterol
Levels study. Neurology. 2008;70:2364–2370.
204. Woo D, Sauerbeck LR, Kissela BM, Khoury JC, Szaflarski JP, Gebel J,
Shukla R, Pancioli AM, Jauch EC, Menon AG, Deka R, Carrozzella JA,
Moomaw CJ, Fontaine RN, Broderick JP. Genetic and environmental
risk factors for intracerebral hemorrhage: preliminary results of a
population-based study. Stroke. 2002;33:1190–1195.
205. Tsementzis SA, Gill JS, Hitchcock ER, Gill SK, Beevers DG. Diurnal
variation of and activity during the onset of stroke. Neurosurgery.
1985;17:901–904.
206. Chae J, Zorowitz RD, Johnston MV. Functional outcome of hemorrhagic and nonhemorrhagic stroke patients after in-patient rehabilitation.
Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 1996;75:177–182.
2128 Stroke September 2010
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on May 27, 2014
207. Kelly PJ, Furie KL, Shafqat S, Rallis N, Chang Y, Stein J. Functional
recovery following rehabilitation after hemorrhagic and ischemic stroke.
Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2003;84:968–972.
208. Schepers VP, Ketelaar M, Visser-Meily AJ, de Groot V, Twisk JW,
Lindeman E. Functional recovery differs between ischaemic and haemorrhagic stroke patients. J Rehabil Med. 2008;40:487–489.
209. Hemphill JC 3rd, Farrant M, Neill TA Jr. Prospective validation of the ICH
Score for 12-month functional outcome. Neurology. 2009;73:1088–1094.
210. Stroke Unit Trialists’ Collaboration. Organised inpatient (stroke unit)
care for stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007:CD000197.
211. Outpatient Service Trialists.Therapy-based rehabilitation services for
stroke patients at home. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003:CD002925.
212. Zahuranec DB, Morgenstern LB, Garcia NM, Conley KM, Lisabeth LD, Rank
GS, Smith MA, Meurer WJ, Resnicow K, Brown DL. Stroke health and risk
education (SHARE) pilot project: feasibility and need for church-based stroke
health promotion in a bi-ethnic community. Stroke. 2008;39:1583–1585.
213. Hawkes CA, McLaurin J. Selective targeting of perivascular macrophages for clearance of beta-amyloid in cerebral amyloid angiopathy.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009;106:1261–1266.
214. Schroeter S, Khan K, Barbour R, Doan M, Chen M, Guido T, Gill D,
Basi G, Schenk D, Seubert P, Games D. Immunotherapy reduces
vascular amyloid-beta in PDAPP mice. J Neurosci. 2008;28:
6787–6793.
215. Morgenstern LB, Bartholomew LK, Grotta JC, Staub L, King M, Chan
W. Sustained benefit of a community and professional intervention to
increase acute stroke therapy. Arch Intern Med. 2003;163:2198–2202.
216. Ratan RR, Siddiq A, Smirnova N, Karpisheva K, Haskew-Layton R,
McConoughey S, Langley B, Estevez A, Huerta PT, Volpe B, Roy S,
Sen CK, Gazaryan I, Cho S, Fink M, LaManna J. Harnessing hypoxic
adaptation to prevent, treat, and repair stroke. J Mol Med. 2007;85:
1331–1338.
217. Zhao X, Grotta J, Gonzales N, Aronowski J. Hematoma resolution as a
therapeutic target: the role of microglia/macrophages. Stroke. 2009;
40(suppl):S92–S94.
218. He Y, Wan S, Hua Y, Keep RF, Xi G. Autophagy after experimental
intracerebral hemorrhage. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2008;28:
897–905.
Morgenstern et al Intracerebral Hemorrhage Guideline 2129
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on May 27, 2014
Guías AHA/ASA
Guías para el manejo de la hemorragia intracerebral
espontánea
Una guía para los profesionales de la salud de la American
Heart Association/American Stroke Association
La American Academy of Neurology avala el valor de estas guías como instrumento
de formación para los neurólogos.
La American Association of Neurological Surgeons y el Congress of Neurological
Surgeons han revisado este documento y avalan su contenido de formación.
Lewis B. Morgenstern, MD, FAHA, FAAN, Presidente;
J. Claude Hemphill III, MD, MAS, FAAN, Vicepresidente; Craig Anderson, MBBS, PhD, FRACP;
Kyra Becker, MD; Joseph P. Broderick, MD, FAHA; E. Sander Connolly, Jr, MD, FAHA;
Steven M. Greenberg, MD, PhD, FAHA, FAAN; James N. Huang, MD; R. Loch Macdonald, MD, PhD;
Steven R. Messé, MD, FAHA; Pamela H. Mitchell, RN, PhD, FAHA, FAAN;
 Magdy Selim, MD, PhD, FAHA; Rafael J. Tamargo, MD; en nombre del American Heart Association
Stroke Council y el Council on Cardiovascular Nursing
Objetivo—El objetivo de estas guías es presentar recomendaciones actuales y detalladas para el diagnóstico y el tratamiento de la hemorragia intracerebral espontánea aguda.
Métodos—Se llevó a cabo una búsqueda bibliográfica formal en MEDLINE. Los datos se sintetizaron con el empleo de tablas de evidencia. Los miembros del comité de redacción celebraron teleconferencias para comentar las recomendaciones derivadas de los datos. Se utilizó el algoritmo de niveles de evidencia del American Heart Association Stroke Council para establecer el grado de cada recomendación. Antes de hacerlas públicas, las guías fueron revisadas, en su versión
preliminar, por 6 revisores expertos y por los miembros del Stroke Council Scientific Statements Oversight Committee y
del Stroke Council Leadership Committee. Se pretende actualizar estas guías en un plazo de 3 años.
Resultados—Se presentan las guías basadas en la evidencia para la asistencia de los pacientes que presentan una hemorragia intracerebral. Se subdividió el tema en los apartados de diagnóstico, hemostasia, manejo de la presión arterial, manejo del paciente hospitalizado y de enfermería, prevención de comorbilidades médicas, tratamiento quirúrgico, predicción
de los resultados, rehabilitación, prevención de recurrencias y consideraciones futuras.
Conclusiones—La hemorragia intracerebral es un trastorno médico grave cuya evolución puede verse influida por una
asistencia temprana agresiva. Las guías aportan un marco de referencia para el tratamiento dirigido a objetivos en los
La American Heart Association hace todo lo posible por evitar cualquier conflicto de intereses real o potencial que pueda surgir como resultado de una
relación externa o de un interés personal, profesional o de negocios de alguno de los miembros del panel de redacción. Concretamente, se exige a todos
los miembros del grupo de redacción que completen y presenten un Cuestionario de declaración de conflictos de intereses en el que consten todas las
relaciones de este tipo que pudieran ser percibidas como conflictos de intereses reales o potenciales.
Esta declaración fue aprobada por el American Heart Association Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee el 19 de mayo de 2010. Puede accederse a una copia de la declaración en inglés en http://www.americanheart.org/presenter.jhtml?identifier=3003999, pulsando en el vínculo de “topic list”
o en el de “chronological list” (No. KB-0044). Para adquirir copias impresas adicionales, llame al 843-216-2533 o envíe un correo electrónico a kelle.
ramsay@wolterskluwer.com.
La American Heart Association solicita que este documento se cite de la siguiente forma: Morgenstern LB, Hemphill JC 3rd, Anderson C, Becker K,
Broderick JP, Connolly ES Jr, Greenberg SM, Huang JN, Macdonald RL, Messé SR, Mitchell PH, Selim M, Tamargo RJ; on behalf of the American
Heart Association Stroke Council and Council on Cardiovascular Nursing. Guidelines for the management of spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage: a
guideline for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2010;41:2108–2129.
La revisión de expertos de las AHA Scientific Statements se lleva a cabo en el AHA National Center. Para más información sobre el desarrollo de las
directrices y las declaraciones de la AHA, consúltese http://www.americanheart.org/presenter.jhtml?identifier=3023366.
Permisos. No se autoriza la realización de múltiples copias, modificación, alteración, adición o distribución de este documento sin la autorización expresa de la American Heart Association. Las instrucciones para la obtención de permisos pueden consultarse en http://www.americanheart.org/presenter.
jhtml?identifier=4431. En el lado derecho de esa página aparece un vínculo con el “Permission Request Form”.
© 2010 American Heart Association, Inc.
Stroke está disponible en http://www.stroke.ahajournals.org DOI: 10.1161/STR.0b013e3181ec611b
24
Morgenstern y cols. Guías para el manejo de la hemorragia intracerebral espontánea 25
La hemorragia intracerebral (HIC) no traumática espontánea
es una causa importante de morbilidad y mortalidad en todo el mundo. Aunque es mucho lo que se ha comentado sobre
la falta de una terapia dirigida específica, se ha hablado mucho
menos del éxito y los objetivos de la asistencia médica y quirúrgica agresiva en este trastorno. Estudios recientes de base poblacional sugieren que la mayor parte de los pacientes presentan
HIC pequeñas en las que es fácil conseguir la supervivencia con
una buena asistencia médica1
. Esto sugiere que es probable que
una asistencia médica excelente tenga una repercusión directa
importante en la morbilidad y mortalidad de la HIC actualmente, incluso antes de haber encontrado un tratamiento específico.
De hecho, como se comenta más adelante, la agresividad global
de la asistencia de la HIC está directamente relacionada con la
mortalidad por esta enfermedad2
. Uno de los objetivos de estas
guías es, pues, recordar a los clínicos la importancia que tiene la
asistencia que prestan para determinar el resultado de la HIC, así
como proporcionar un marco de referencia basado en la evidencia para dicha asistencia.
Para que esta revisión sea concisa y fácil de utilizar para
los clínicos, se remite al lector a otras publicaciones para una
información detallada sobre la epidemiologia de la HIC1,3,4.
De igual modo, se están realizando en todo el mundo múltiples estudios clínicos sobre esta enfermedad. Se recomienda
al lector que remita pacientes a estas importantes iniciativas, que pueden consultarse en http://www.strokecenter.org/
trials/. No comentaremos los estudios en marcha, ya que no
podemos abordarlos todos; este declaración se centra en los
tratamientos actualmente disponibles. Por último, recientemente se han publicado unas guías sobre el ictus pediátrico5
que hacen innecesario repetir aquí las cuestiones relativas a
la HIC pediátrica.
Las últimas guías sobre la HIC se publicaron en 20076
, y el
presente artículo es una actualización de las mismas. Por consiguiente, se especifican en el presente trabajo las diferencias
respecto a las recomendaciones previas. El grupo de redacción
mantuvo contactos telefónicos para determinar las subcategorías a evaluar. Éstas fueron las siguientes: diagnóstico de
urgencia y la evaluación de la HIC y sus causas; hemostasia,
presión arterial (PA); presión intracraneal (PIC)/fiebre/glucosa/ crisis epilépticas/hidrocefalia; hierro; monitores de PIC/
oxigenación tisular; extracción del coágulo; hemorragia intraventricular (HIV); retirada del apoyo tecnológico; prevención
de HIC recurrente; cuidados de enfermería; rehabilitación/
recuperación; consideraciones futuras. Cada subcategoría fue
dirigida por un autor, con contribuciones de 1 ó 2 autores más.
Se realizaron búsquedas completas en MEDLINE de todos los
artículos publicados en inglés relevantes para el tratamiento
de la enfermedad humana. Las versiones preliminares de resúmenes y recomendaciones se distribuyeron a todo el grupo de
redacción para la obtención de una retroalimentación. Se celebró una reunión para comentar las cuestiones controvertidas.
Las diversas secciones fueron revisadas y combinadas por el
Presidente. La propuesta resultante fue enviada a todo el grupo
de redacción para recabar sus comentarios. Estos comentarios
fueron incorporados por el Vicepresidente y el Presidente, y
se solicitó a todo el comité que aprobara la propuesta final. El
Presidente y el Vicepresidente realizaron cambios en el documento en respuesta a lo indicado por los revisores expertos, y
el documento fue enviado de nuevo a todo el grupo de redacción para la valoración y aprobación de los cambios sugeridos.
Para las recomendaciones se siguen los métodos de clasificación del nivel de certidumbre del efecto del tratamiento y
la clase de evidencia del American Heart Association Stroke
Council (Tablas 1 y 2). Todas las recomendaciones de Clase I
se indican en la Tabla 3.
Diagnóstico de urgencia y evaluación
de la HIC y sus causas
La HIC es una emergencia médica. Un diagnóstico rápido y
un manejo cuidadoso de los pacientes con HIC son cruciales,
ya que el deterioro temprano es frecuente en las primeras horas siguientes al inicio de la HIC. Más del 20% de los pacientes presentarán una reducción de la puntuación de la Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) de ≥  2 puntos entre la evaluación
realizada por los servicios de emergencias médicas antes de
llegar al hospital y la evaluación inicial llevada a cabo en el
servicio de urgencias (SU)7
. En los pacientes que presentan
un agravamiento neurológico prehospitalario, la puntuación
de la GCS se reduce en una media de 6 puntos y la tasa de
mortalidad es > 75%. Además, en la primera hora siguiente
a la llegada al hospital, un 15% de los pacientes presenta una
disminución de la puntuación de la GCS de ≥ 2 puntos8
. El
riesgo de deterioro neurológico temprano y la elevada tasa
de mala evolución a largo plazo subrayan la necesidad de un
manejo temprano agresivo.
Manejo prehospitalario
El objetivo principal en el contexto prehospitalario es aportar
un apoyo ventilatorio y cardiovascular y trasladar al paciente al centro más próximo que esté capacitado para atender a
pacientes con ictus agudo (véase el apartado siguiente sobre
manejo en el SU). Las prioridades secundarias para los prestadores de servicios de emergencias médicas consisten en obtener una historia clínica específica respecto al momento de
aparición de los síntomas (o el último momento en el que el
paciente estaba normal) e información sobre antecedentes patológicos, medicación y consumo de sustancias. Por último,
los prestadores de servicios de emergencias médicas deben
notificar anticipadamente al SU la llegada inminente de un
paciente con un posible ictus, de manera que puedan iniciarse
las vías de actuación clave y pueda alertarse a los servicios de
pacientes con hemorragia intracerebral. (Traducido del inglés: Guidelines for the Management of Spontaneous
Intracerebral Hemorrhage: A Guideline for Healthcare Professionals From the American Heart Association/
American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2010; 41:2108-2129.)
Palabras clave: AHA Scientific Statements n intracerebral hemorrhage n treatment n diagnosis
n intracranial pressure n hydrocephalus n surgery
26 Stroke Abril 2011
consulta. Se ha demostrado que la notificación anticipada por
parte de los servicios de emergencias médicas reduce significativamente el tiempo que transcurre hasta la realización de
la tomografía computarizada (TC) en el SU9.
Manejo en el SU
Es de capital importancia que todos los SU estén preparados
para tratar a los pacientes con HIC o dispongan de un plan
para su rápido traslado a un centro terciario. Los recursos necesarios para el manejo de los pacientes con HIC incluyen
neurología, neurorradiología, neurocirugía e instalaciones
para cuidados críticos, incluida la disponibilidad de médicos y enfermeras con la formación adecuada. En el SU, debe contactarse lo antes posible con los servicios de consulta
apropiados, y debe realizarse la evaluación clínica de manera
eficiente, con médicos y enfermeras trabajando en paralelo.
En la Tabla 4 se describen los componentes fundamentales
de la historia clínica, exploración física y exploraciones diagnósticas que deben obtenerse en el SU.
En los pacientes con HIC; el manejo de urgencias debe incluir intervenciones neuroquirúrgicas para la evacuación del
hematoma, drenaje ventricular externo o vigilancia invasiva
y tratamiento de la PIC, manejo de la PA, intubación y reversión de la coagulopatía. Aunque muchos centros disponen
de vías de actuación críticas que se han desarrollado para el
tratamiento del ictus isquémico agudo, son pocos los que tienen protocolos para el manejo de la HIC18. Estas vías pueden
permitir un manejo más eficiente, estandarizado e integrado
de los pacientes en estado crítico con HIC.
Neuroimagen
La aparición súbita de síntomas neurológicos focales se atribuye a un origen vascular mientras no se demuestre lo contrario. Sin embargo, es imposible saber si los síntomas se deTabla 1. Aplicación de la clasificación de las recomendaciones y el nivel de evidencia
 *Datos disponibles procedentes de ensayos clínicos o registros acerca de la utilidad/eficacia en diferentes subpoblaciones, como las establecidas según el sexo, edad,
antecedentes de diabetes, antecedentes de IM, antecedentes de insuficiencia cardíaca y uso previo de ácido acetilsalicílico. Una recomendación con Nivel de Evidencia
B o C no implica que la recomendación sea débil. Muchas cuestiones clínicas importantes abordadas en las directrices no pueden estudiarse con ensayos clínicos. A
pesar de que no haya ensayos aleatorizados, puede haber un consenso clínico muy claro respecto a que una determinada prueba o tratamiento es útil o eficaz.
†En 2003, el Grupo de Trabajo de ACC/AHA sobre Directrices para la Práctica Clínica desarrolló una relación de expresiones sugeridas para ser utilizadas en la
redacción de las directrices. Todas las recomendaciones de las directrices han sido redactadas en frases completas que expresan un pensamiento completo, de tal
manera que una recomendación, incluso si se separa y se presenta aisladamente respecto al resto del documento (incluyendo los encabezamientos de cada serie de
recomendaciones) debería continuar expresando la intención plena de la recomendación. Se espera que esto aumente la comprensión de las directrices por parte
del lector y permita realizar consultas de recomendaciones individuales.
MAGNITUD DEL EFECTO DEL TRATAMIENTO
ESTIMACIÓN DE LA CERTEZA (PRECISIÓN) DEL EFECTO DEL TRATAMIENTO
Nivel A
Múltiples poblaciones
evaluadas*
Datos derivados de
múltiples ensayos
clínicos aleatorizados
o metaanálisis
Nivel B
Número limitado de
poblaciones evaluadas*
Datos derivados de
un único ensayo
aleatorizado o de
estudios no
aleatorizados
Nivel C
Número muy limitado de
poblaciones evaluadas*
Solamente opinión de
consenso de expertos,
estudios de casos o
norma de asistencia
Clase I
Beneficio >>> Riesgo
El procedimiento/
tratamiento DEBE
realizarse/administrarse
■ Recomendación de que
el procedimiento o
tratamiento es útil/eficaz
■ Evidencia suficiente
basada en múltiples ensayos
aleatorizados o metaanálisis
■ Recomendación de que
el procedimiento o
tratamiento es útil/eficaz
■ Evidencia limitada basada
en un solo ensayo
aleatorizado o en estudios
no aleatorizados
■ Recomendación de que
el procedimiento o
tratamiento es útil/eficaz
■ Solamente opinión de
expertos, estudios de casos
o la asistencia estándar
debe
se recomienda
está indicado
es útil/eficaz/beneficioso
Clase IIb
Beneficio ≥ Riesgo
Son necesarios nuevos estudios con objetivos amplios;
sería útil disponer de datos
adicionales de registros
PUEDE CONSIDERARSE
el procedimiento/tratamiento
■ Utilidad/eficacia de la
recomendación no tan bien
establecida
■ Mayor evidencia contradictoria procedente de
múltiples ensayos aleatorizados o metaanálisis
■ Utilidad/eficacia de la
recomendación no tan bien
establecida
■ Mayor evidencia contradictoria procedente de un
solo ensayo aleatorizado
o de estudios no aleatorizados
■ Utilidad/eficacia de la
recomendación no tan bien
establecida
■ Solamente opiniones de
expertos, estudios de casos
o la asistencia estándar
divergentes
puede/podría considerarse
puede/podría ser razonable
utilidad/efectividad
desconocida/poco
clara/incierta o no bien
establecida
Clase III
Riesgo ≥ Beneficio
El procedimiento/trata
miento NO debe
realizarse/administrarse
PUESTO QUE NO ES
ÚTIL Y PUEDE SER
NOCIVO
■ Recomendación de que
el procedimiento o tratamiento no es útil/eficaz y
puede ser nocivo
■ Evidencia suficiente
procedente de múltiples
ensayos aleatorizados o
metaanálisis
■ Recomendación de que
el procedimiento o tratamiento no es útil/eficaz
y puede ser nocivo
■ Evidencia limitada procedente de un solo ensayo
aleatorizado o de estudios
no aleatorizados
■ Recomendación de que
el procedimiento o tratamiento no es útil/eficaz y
puede ser nocivo
■ Solamente opiniones de
expertos, estudios de casos
o la asistencia estándar
no se recomienda
no está indicado
no debe
no es útil/eficaz/beneficioso
puede ser nocivo
Clase IIa
Beneficio >> Riesgo
Son necesarios nuevos
estudios con objetivos
específicos
ES RAZONABLE realizar
el procedimiento/administrar el tratamiento
■ Recomendación favorable
a que el procedimiento o
tratamiento es útil/eficaz
■ Alguna evidencia
contradictoria procedente
de múltiples ensayos
aleatorizados o metaanálisis
■ Recomendación favorable
a que el procedimiento o
tratamiento es útil/eficaz
■ Alguna evidencia
contradictoria procedente
de un único ensayo
aleatorizado o de
estudios no aleatorizados
■ Recomendación favorable
a que el procedimiento o
tratamiento es útil/eficaz
■ Solamente opiniones de
expertos, estudios de casos
o la asistencia estándar
divergentes es razonable
puede ser
útil/eficaz/beneficioso
está probablemente
recomendado o indicado
Morgenstern y cols. Guías para el manejo de la hemorragia intracerebral espontánea 27
ben a isquemia o a hemorragia mediante las manifestaciones
clínicas solamente. La presencia de vómitos, la PA sistólica
> 220 mmHg, la cefalea intensa, el coma o la reducción del
nivel de conciencia, y la progresión en un plazo de minutos
u horas son factores que sugieren una HIC, aunque ninguno de ellos es específico; las exploraciones de neuroimagen
son, pues, imprescindibles19. Tanto la TC como la resonancia
magnética (RM) son opciones razonables para la evaluación
inicial. La TC es muy sensible para identificar la hemorragia aguda y se considera el patrón de referencia; la RM de
eco gradiente y de ponderación de sensibilidad T2* son igual
de sensibles que la TC para la detección de sangre aguda, y
son más sensibles para la identificación de una hemorragia
previa20,21. Sin embargo, los factores de tiempo, coste, proximidad al SU, tolerancia del paciente, estado clínico y disponibilidad de RM pueden impedir la obtención de una RM en
una proporción considerable de casos22.
La elevada tasa de deterioro neurológico temprano tras la
HIC está relacionada en parte con la hemorragia activa que
puede evolucionar durante horas tras el inicio de los síntomas.
Cuanto menor es el periodo de tiempo entre el inicio de los síntomas y la primera exploración de neuroimagen más probable
es que las exploraciones posteriores muestren la expansión del
hematoma15,23,24. De los pacientes en los que se obtiene una
TC craneal en un plazo de 3 horas tras el inicio de la HIC, un
28% a 38% presentan una expansión del hematoma de más de
una tercera parte en la TC de seguimiento8,25. La expansión del
hematoma tiene valor predictivo respecto al deterioro clínico
y el aumento de la morbimortalidad8,10,15,25. Por consiguiente,
la identificación de los pacientes con riesgo de expansión del
hematoma es un campo de investigación activa. La angio-TC y
la TC con contraste pueden identificar a pacientes con un riesgo elevado de expansión de la HIC en función de la presencia
de extravasación de contraste en el interior del hematoma26-30.
La RM/angiografía/flebografía y la TC angiografía/flebografía
son razonablemente sensibles para identificar las causas secundarias de hemorragia, como malformaciones arteriovenosas,
tumores, moyamoya y trombosis venosa cerebral31–33. Puede
contemplarse la realización de una angiografía con catéter si
el nivel de sospecha clínica es elevado y las exploraciones no
invasivas sugieren una causa vascular subyacente. La sospecha
clínica de una causa secundaria de HIC puede incluir un pródromo de cefalea o síntomas neurológicos o constitucionales.
Debe plantearse una sospecha neurológica de causas secundarias de HIC ante la presencia de hemorragia subaracnoidea,
forma del hematoma poco habitual (no circular), presencia de
edema desproporcionado respecto al poco tiempo transcurrido desde la primera visualización de la HIC, una localización
poco habitual de la hemorragia y la presencia en el cerebro de
otras estructuras anormales como una masa. Debe realizarse
una flebo-RM o flebo-TC si la localización de la hemorragia,
el volumen de edema relativo o un signo anormal en los senos
cerebrales en las exploraciones de imagen estándar sugieren
una trombosis venosa central.
En resumen, la HIC es una emergencia médica, caracterizada por una elevada morbimortalidad, que debe ser diagnosticada con rapidez y tratada de forma agresiva. La expansión
del hematoma y el deterioro temprano son frecuentes en las
primeras horas siguientes al inicio del cuadro.
Recomendaciones
1. Se recomienda la obtención rápida de exploraciones
de neuroimagen, con TC o RM para diferenciar el
ictus isquémico de la HIC (Clase I; Nivel de evidencia
A). (No se ha modificado respecto a las guías previas)
2. Cabe considerar la angio-TC o la TC con contraste
para facilitar la identificación de los pacientes con
riesgo de expansión del hematoma (Clase IIb; Nivel
de evidencia B), y la angio-TC, flebo-TC, TC con
contraste, RM con contraste, angio-RM y flebo-RM
pueden ser útiles para evaluar las lesiones estructurales subyacentes, incluidas las malformaciones
vasculares y los tumores cuando hay una sospecha
clínica o radiológica (Clase IIa; Nivel de evidencia B).
(Nueva recomendación)
Tratamiento médico de la HIC
Hemostasia/antiagregantes plaquetarios/profilaxis
de trombosis venosa profunda
Las anomalías de la hemostasia subyacentes pueden contribuir a producir la HIC. Los pacientes en riesgo son los que
Tabla 2. Definición de las clases y niveles de evidencia utilizados
en las recomendaciones del American Heart Association Stroke Council
Clase I Trastornos para los que existe una evidencia
 y/o un acuerdo general respecto a que el
 procedimiento o el tratamiento resulta
 beneficioso, útil y eficaz.
Clase II Trastornos para los que existe una evidencia
 contradictoria y/o una divergencia de
 opinión respecto a la utilidad/eficacia
 de un procedimiento o tratamiento.
Clase IIa El peso de la evidencia u opinión se decanta
 a favor de la utilidad/eficacia.
Clase IIb La utilidad/eficacia no está tan bien
 establecida por la evidencia u opinión.
Clase III Trastornos para los que existe una evidencia
 y/o un acuerdo general respecto a que el
 procedimiento o tratamiento no es
 útil/efectivo, y en algunos casos puede
 ser nocivo.
Recomendaciones terapéuticas
Nivel de evidencia A Datos procedentes de múltiples ensayos
 clínicos aleatorizados o metanálisis.
Datos procedentes de múltiples estudios
 de cohorte prospectivos que utilizan una
 referencia estándar aplicada por un
 evaluador con diseño ciego.
Datos procedentes de un único estudio de
 grado A o de uno o más estudios de casos
 y controles o estudios que utilizan una
 referencia estándar aplicada por un
 evaluador con diseño ciego.
Datos procedentes de un único ensayo
 aleatorizado o de estudios no aleatorizados.
Opinión de consenso de expertos, estudios
 de casos o tipo de asistencia estándar.
Nivel de evidencia B
Nivel de evidencia C
Recomendaciones diagnósticas
Nivel de evidencia A
Nivel de evidencia B
Nivel de evidencia C Opinión de consenso de expertos. 
28 Stroke Abril 2011
están siendo tratados con anticoagulantes orales (AO), los
que presentan deficiencias de factores de la coagulación adquiridos o congénitos y los que tienen anomalías plaquetarias
cualitativas o cuantitativas. Los pacientes que están siendo
tratados con AO constituyen un 12% a 14% de los pacientes
con HIC34,35, y con el aumento en el uso de warfarina, este
porcentaje parece estar aumentando36. La identificación de
una coagulopatía subyacente brinda, pues, la oportunidad de
corregir la estrategia de tratamiento. En los pacientes con una
deficiencia de un factor de la coagulación y trombocitopenia,
está indicada la reposición del factor apropiado o de plaquetas.
En los pacientes tratados con AO que presentan una hemorragia con peligro para la vida, como una hemorragia
intracraneal, la recomendación general consiste en corregir
la ratio normalizada internacional (INR) de la manera más
rápida posible37,38. Históricamente se han recomendado las
infusiones de vitamina K y plasma fresco congelado (FFP),
pero más recientemente han aparecido los concentrados de
complejo de protrombina (PCC) y el factor VIIa recombinante (rFVIIa) como posibles tratamientos. La vitamina K continúa siendo un elemento adyuvante para el tratamiento inicial
más rápido en las hemorragias asociadas a AO con peligro
para la vida, debido a que, aunque se administre por vía intravenosa, requiere horas para corregir la INR39-41. La eficacia
del FFP es limitada, debido al riesgo de reacciones transfusionales alérgicas e infecciosas, el tiempo de procesamiento
y el volumen necesario para la corrección. La probabilidad
de corrección de la INR a las 24 horas estuvo relacionada con
el tiempo transcurrido hasta la administración de FFP en un
1 estudio, aunque el 17% de los pacientes continuaban sin
tener una INR ≤ 1,4 en ese momento, lo cual sugiere que el
FFP administrado de esta forma puede ser insuficiente para
una corrección rápida de la coagulopatía42.
Los PCC son concentrados de factores de origen plasmático que se usan para tratar la deficiencia de factor IX. Dado
que los PCC contienen también los factores II, VII y X, además del IX, su uso se recomienda cada vez más para la reversión del efecto de warfarina. Los PCC tienen las ventajas de
una reconstitución y administración rápidas, de tener concentraciones elevadas de factores de la coagulación en volúmenes pequeños y de ser procesados de manera que se inactivan
Tabla 3. Recomendaciones de clase I
Recomendaciones Clase/nivel de evidencia
Diagnóstico de urgencia y evaluación de la HIC
y sus causas
Se recomienda la obtención rápida de exploraciones de neuroimagen,
 con TC o RM para diferenciar el ictus isquémico de la HIC. (No se ha
 modificado respecto a las guías previas)
Clase I, Nivel A
Tratamiento médico de la HIC Los pacientes con una deficiencia grave de factores de la coagulación
 o trombocitopenia grave deben recibir un tratamiento sustitutivo adecuado
 de factores o plaquetas, respectivamente. (Nueva recomendación)
Clase I, Nivel C
Hemostasia/antiagregantes plaquetarios/profilaxis
de TVP
En los pacientes con HIC cuya INR está elevada a causa de AO debe
 suspenderse la administración de warfarina, se les debe administrar
 un tratamiento sustitutivo de factores dependientes de la vitamina K
 se debe corregir la INR y se debe administrar vitamina K intravenosa.
 (Modificada respecto a las guías previas)
Clase I, Nivel C
En los pacientes con HIC debe aplicarse compresión neumática intermitente
 para la prevención del tromboembolismo venoso, además de medias
 elásticas. (No se ha modificado respecto a las guías previas)
Clase I, Nivel B
Manejo del paciente hospitalizado y prevención
del daño cerebral secundario
Vigilancia general La monitorización y manejo inicial de los pacientes con HIC deben tener
 lugar en una unidad cuidados intensivos con médicos y enfermeras con
 conocimientos de cuidados intensivos de neurociencias. (No se ha
 modificado respecto a las guías previas)
Clase I, Nivel B
Manejo de la glucosa Debe efectuarse una vigilancia de la glucosa y se recomienda la normoglucemia. Clase I, Nivel C
Crisis epilépticas y fármacos antiepilépticos Las crisis epilépticas clínicas deben tratarse con fármacos antiepilépticos.
 (Modificado respecto a las guías previas)
En los pacientes con un cambio del estado mental, en los que se identifican
 crisis epilépticas electrográficas en el EEG deben ser tratados con fármacos
 antiepilépticos.
Clase I, Nivel A
Clase I, Nivel C
Procedimientos/Cirugía—extracción del coágulo En los pacientes con hemorragia cerebelosa que sufren un deterioro neurológico
 o que presentan una compresión de tronco encefálico y/o hidrocefalia por
 obstrucción ventricular, debe realizarse una extracción quirúrgica de la
 hemorragia lo antes posible. (Modificada respecto a las guías previas)
Clase I, Nivel B
Prevención de la HIC recurrente Tras el periodo agudo de la HIC, si no hay contraindicaciones médicas,
 debe obtenerse un buen control de la PA, en especial en los pacientes
 con una localización de la HIC característica de la vasculopatía hipertensiva.
 (Nueva recomendación)
Clase I, Nivel A
 TC, indica tomografía computarizada; RM, resonancia magnética; TVP, trombosis venosa profunda; INR, ratio normalizada internacional; AO, anticoagulantes orales;
y EEG, electroencefalograma. 
Morgenstern y cols. Guías para el manejo de la hemorragia intracerebral espontánea 29
los agentes infecciosos. Aunque los diferentes preparados de
PCC difieren en las cantidades relativas de factores (siendo
el VII el que es más probable que sea bajo), varios estudios
han demostrado que los PCC pueden normalizar rápidamente la INR (en un plazo de minutos) en los pacientes tratados
con AO (revisado en43-45). En revisiones retrospectivas no
aleatorizadas y en un estudio pequeño de casos y controles,
se ha demostrado una corrección más rápida de la INR con
vitamina K y PCC que con vitamina K y FFP, pero no se
han observado diferencias en los resultados clínicos46-48. Un
ensayo aleatorizado comparó el uso de un PCC (Konyne) para complementar al FFP con el uso de FFP solo en pacientes con HIC asociada a AO, y observó que los pacientes que
fueron tratados con PCC presentaron un tiempo hasta la corrección de la INR significativamente inferior y recibieron
un menor volumen de FPP. Aunque no hubo diferencias de
resultados, los pacientes tratados con FFP presentaron más
acontecimientos adversos, atribuibles principalmente a una
sobrecarga de líquidos49. Aunque teóricamente los PCC pueden aumentar el riesgo de complicaciones trombóticas, este
riesgo parece ser relativamente bajo43. A pesar de la falta de
ensayos grandes aleatorizados y bien controlados, los PCC se
recomiendan de manera creciente como opción de tratamiento en las guías que se han presentado para la reversión de los
efectos de warfarina en el contexto de las hemorragias con
peligro para la vida o intracraneales asociadas a los AO37,38,50-
52. En la Tabla 5 se presenta una relación de varios productos
para la terapia sustitutiva de factores de la coagulación en la
reversión de la acción de warfarina que se comercializan en
EEUU en la actualidad.
El rFVIIa, que ha sido autorizado para el tratamiento de
pacientes con hemofilia con un título elevado de inhibidores
o con una deficiencia congénita de factor VII, ha generado
un gran interés como posible tratamiento de las HIC espontáneas o asociadas a AO. Aunque el rFVIIa puede normalizar rápidamente la INR en el contexto de la HIC asociada
a AO53-57, no repone todos los factores dependientes de la
vitamina K y, por tanto, puede no restablecer la generación
Tabla 4. Elementos fundamentales de la historia clínica, exploración física
y estudio diagnóstico del paciente con HIC en el SU
Comentarios
Historia clínica
Momento de inicio de los síntomas
(o último momento en el que el
paciente estaba normal)
Síntomas iniciales y progresión
de los síntomas
Factores de riesgo vasculares Hipertensión arterial, diabetes, hipercolesterolemia
 y tabaquismo
Medicaciones Anticoagulantes, antiagregantes plaquetarios,
 descongestionantes, medicaciones
 antihipertensivas, estimulantes (incluidas las
 píldoras para adelgazar), simpaticomiméticos
Traumatismo o cirugía Endarterectomía carotídea o implantación de stent
recientes carotídeo en particular, puesto que la HIC puede
 estar relacionada con la hipoperfusión después
 de estas intervenciones
Demencia Asociada a angiopatía amiloide
Consumo de alcohol o La cocaína y otras sustancias simpaticomiméticas
drogas ilegales se asocian a la HIC, estimulantes
Crisis epilépticas
Hepatopatía
Cáncer y trastornos
hematológicos
Puede asociarse a coagulopatía
Puede asociarse a coagulopatía
Exploración física
Constantes vitales La fiebre se asocia a un deterioro neurológico
 temprano10
La presión arterial inicial más alta se asocia
 a un deterioro neurológico temprano y un
 aumento de la mortalidad11
Una exploración física
general centrada en la cabeza,
el corazón, los pulmones,
el abdomen y las extremidades
Una exploración neurológica
completa pero realizada
con urgencia
Una entrevista estructurada como la National
Institutes of Health Stroke Scale puede
completarse en unos minutos y aporta una
cuantificación que permite una comunicación
fácil de la gravedad del evento a otros cuidadores.
La puntuación de la GCS es igual de bien conocida
y fácil de calcular que la puntuación de la GCS y
es un potente predictor de los resultados a largo
plazo.12,13 Pueden complementarse según las
necesidades
Análisis de suero y orina
Hemograma completo,
electrólitos, nitrógeno
de urea en sangre y
creatinina, glucosa
La creatinina elevada se asocia a una expansión
del hematoma. La glucosa sérica elevada se
asocia a una expansión del hematoma y un
peor resultado (aunque no hay datos que
sugieren que la normalización mejore el
resultado)11,14
Tiempo de protrombina
o INR y tiempo de
tromboplastina parcial
activado
Las hemorragias asociadas a warfarina
se asocian a un aumento del volumen
del hematoma, un mayor riesgo de
expansión y un aumento de la
morbilidad y mortalidad 15,17
(Continúa)
Tabla 4. Continuación
Comentarios
Batería de toxicología en
pacientes jóvenes y de
mediana edad para
detectar cocaína y
otras sustancias simpaticomiméticas de abuso
La cocaína y otras sustancias
 simpaticomiméticas se asocian a la HIC
Análisis de orina y
urinocultivo, y prueba
de embarazo en una mujer en edad fértil
Otras pruebas de uso habitual
Para evaluar la isquemia coronaria activa o
 la lesión cardiaca previa puede indicar
 una mala función cardiaca y para obtener
 un registro basal en caso de que se
 produzcan problemas cardiopulmonares
 durante la hospitalización
ECG
Radiografía de tórax
Neuroimagen Según lo descrito en el texto
GCS indica Glasgow Coma Scale; ECG, electrocardiograma.
30 Stroke Abril 2011
de trombina igual de bien que los PCC58. A la vista de los
datos limitados existentes, una reciente revisión basada en la
evidencia, llevada a cabo por la American Society of Hematology, hizo una recomendación en contra del uso sistemático
de rFVIIa para la reversión del efecto de warfarina59.
El rFVIIa se ha estudiado también en pacientes con una
HIC no asociada a AO. En un ensayo aleatorizado de fase
2 se observó que el tratamiento con rFVIIa en un plazo de
4 horas tras el inicio de la HIC limitaba el crecimiento del
hematoma y mejoraba los resultados clínicos en comparación
Tabla 5. Productos comercializados en EEUU para la terapia sustitutiva de factores de la coagulación
Producto Factor(es)
Dosis (se recomienda la consulta a un hematólogo
para determinar la posología específica) Usos
Plasma fresco congelado I (fibrinógeno), II, V, VII, IX, X, XI,
XIII, antitrombina
10 –15 mL/kg con recuperación ideal
 elevarían los niveles del factor en un
 15%–20%
Reversión de AO
Coagulopatía de consumo
Disfunción hepática
Crioprecipitado I, VIII, XIII, vWF 1–2 U/10 kg
Determinado mediante actividad de
 factor IX
Hipo/a-fibrinogenemia
Carencia de productos de factores específicos
 para el déficit de factor VIII o vWD
Déficit de factor XIII
Concentrados de complejo
de protrombina
II, IX, X (pequeñas cantidades
de VII)
VII activado recombinante
Déficit de factor IX (hemofilia B)
Bebulin VH (Baxter),
Profilnine SD (Grifols)
Tanto Bebulin como Profilnine son PCC
 de 3 factores que tienen aproximadamente
 1/10 de la actividad del factor VII en
 comparación con la actividad de factor IX.
 Las cantidades de factor II y X respecto
 al IX son variables, pero para Bebulin
 X>II>IX y para Profilnine II>X≈IX
Posología para la deficiencia de factor IX—
 1 U/kg eleva la actividad en un 1%
La posología para la reversión de los AO
 no está bien validada
Mayor riesgo de complicaciones
 tromboembólicas con dosis superiores
Reversión de AO (no aprobado por la FDA)
NovoSeven RT (Novo
Nordisk)
Para pacientes con hemofilia A o B con
 inhibidores, 90 µg/kg cada 2 h
Para pacientes con déficit de factor VII,
 15–30 µg/kg cada 4–6 h
Déficit de factor VIII o IX con inhibidores
 de factor VIII o IX
Deficiencia de factor VII congénita
No recomendado para HIC espontánea
 o reversión de AO
Concentrados de factor VIII
Derivado de plasma
Alphanate (Grifols)*†
Humate-P (CSL-Behring)*†
Koate-DVI (Bayer)*
Wilate (Octapharma)*†
Inmunoafinidad purificada
Hemofil-M (Baxter)
Monarc-M (Baxter)
Monoclate-P (CSL-Behring)
Recombinante
Advate (Baxter)
Helixate FS (CSL-Behring)
Kogenate FS (Bayer)
Recombinate (Baxter)
Xyntha (Wyeth)
VIII Cada unidad de factor VIII/kg eleva el
 nivel de factor VIII en suero en un 2%
 (habitualmente, una dosis de 50 U/kg
 para elevar el nivel de factor VIII hasta
 el 100%)
Deficiencia de factor VIII (hemofilia A)
Wilate no está indicado para la hemofilia A.
Concentrados de Factor IX
Derivado de plasma
AlphaNine SD (Grifols)
Mononine (Baxter)
Recombinante
BeneFix (Wyeth)
IX Cada unidad de factor IX/kg eleva el
 nivel sérico en un 1% (habitualmente,
 una dosis de 100 U/kg se utiliza para
 elevar el nivel hasta el 100%)
Déficit de factor IX (hemofilia B)
Una unidad de BeneFix eleva al nivel sérico
 en ≈0,83%, con lo que 120 U/kg elevan
 la actividad al 100%.
 vWD indica enfermedad de von Willebrand; FDA, Food and Drug Administration de EEUU; y PCC, concentrados de complejo de protrombina.
 *Contiene también factor von Willebrand.
 †Indicado para la enfermedad de von Willebrand (dosis según unidades de cofactor de ristocetina; el cociente de fVIII respecto a la unidad de cofactor de ristocetina
varía según el producto). 
Morgenstern y cols. Guías para el manejo de la hemorragia intracerebral espontánea 31
con placebo, aunque con una mayor frecuencia de episodios
tromboembólicos (7% frente a 2%)60. Un estudio de fase 3
posterior, en el que se comparó placebo con 20 µg/kg y 80
µg/kg de rFVIIa, no mostró diferencias en los resultados clínicos, a pesar de confirmar la capacidad de ambas dosis de
reducir el crecimiento del hematoma61. Aunque los acontecimientos adversos tromboembólicos graves fueron, en total,
similares, en el grupo con la dosis más alta de rFVIIa (80 µg/
kg), el número de eventos arteriales fue significativamente
mayor que en el grupo placebo. Los autores observaron diferencias entre los grupos de tratamiento, sobre todo por el mayor número de pacientes con HIV en el grupo de dosis más
alta de rFVIIa60. No se ha determinado aún si el rFVIIa aporta un efecto beneficioso en un subgrupo específico de pacientes con HIC, pero en la actualidad sus efectos beneficiosos en
los pacientes con HIC, tanto si están siendo tratados con AO
como si no, continúan sin estar demostrados.
Los estudios sobre el efecto del uso previo de antiagregantes
plaquetarios o de la disfunción plaquetaria en el crecimiento
del hematoma de la HIC y en su evolución han aportado resultados contradictorios. El uso de antiagregantes plaquetarios
no se asoció a la expansión del hematoma ni a los resultados
clínicos en el grupo placebo de un estudio de neuroprotección
en la HIC62. Sin embargo, otros autores han sugerido que la
disfunción plaquetaria, medida con ensayos de la función de
las plaquetas, puede asociarse a la expansión del hematoma y
a los resultados clínicos63,64. No se conoce la utilidad y la seguridad de las transfusiones de plaquetas u otros agentes en los
pacientes con un recuento de plaquetas normal, pero con uso
de antiagregantes plaquetarios o con disfunción plaquetaria.
Los pacientes con HIC tienen un riesgo elevado de enfermedad tromboembólica65. Las mujeres y los individuos afroamericanos parecen tener un riesgo superior65-67. En un ensayo
aleatorizado se ha demostrado que la compresión neumática
intermitente combinada con medias elásticas es superior al
empleo de las medias elásticas solas para reducir la aparición
de trombosis venosa profunda asintomática tras la HIC (4,7%
frente a 15,9%)68. Las medias de compresión gradual por sí
solas son ineficaces para prevenir la trombosis venosa profunda69. Es menos claro, sin embargo, el papel de la adición de
anticoagulación a la compresión neumática. En dos estudios
aleatorizados pequeños se observó una ausencia de diferencias
en la incidencia de trombosis venosa profunda, y no hubo aumento alguno de las hemorragias, en los pacientes tratados con
dosis bajas de heparina subcutánea iniciadas el día 4 o el día
10 tras la HIC70,71. En un estudio no controlado del tratamiento
iniciado el día 2 se observó una reducción de la enfermedad
tromboembólica sin aumento del resangrado70.
Recomendaciones
1. Los pacientes con una deficiencia grave de factores
de la coagulación o trombocitopenia grave deben
recibir un tratamiento sustitutivo adecuado de factores o plaquetas, respectivamente (Clase I; Nivel de
evidencia C). (Nueva recomendación)
2. En los pacientes con HIC cuya INR está elevada a
causa de AO debe suspenderse la administración de
warfarina, se les debe administrar un tratamiento
sustitutivo de factores dependientes de la vitamina
K, se debe corregir la INR y se debe administrar vitamina K intravenosa (Clase I; Nivel de evidencia C).
Los PCC no han mostrado una mejora en comparación con el FFP, pero pueden tener menos complicaciones que éste y es razonable considerar su
empleo como alternativa al FFP (Clase IIa; Nivel de
evidencia B). El rFVIIa no repone todos los factores
de la coagulación y, aunque pueda reducir la INR, la
coagulación puede no restablecerse in vivo; así pues,
el rFVIIa no se recomienda de manera sistemática
como único tratamiento para la reversión de los AO
en la HIC (Clase III; Nivel de evidencia C). (Modificada respecto a las guías previas).
3. Aunque el rFVIIa puede limitar la extensión de la
expansión del hematoma en los pacientes con HIC
no asociada a coagulopatía, hay un aumento del riesgo tromboembólico con el rFVIIa y no hay un beneficio clínico claro en pacientes no seleccionados. Así
pues, no se recomienda el empleo de rFVIIa en pacientes no seleccionados. (Clase III Nivel de evidencia
A). (Nueva recomendación) Serán necesarias nuevas
investigaciones para determinar si hay algún grupo de
pacientes seleccionados en los que pueda obtenerse un
efecto beneficioso con este tratamiento antes de poder
hacer recomendación alguna sobre su uso.
4. La utilidad de las transfusiones de plaquetas en
los pacientes con HIC y antecedentes de uso de antiagregantes plaquetarios no está clara y debe considerarse un tratamiento en fase de investigación (Clase IIb; Nivel de evidencia B). (Nueva recomendación).
5. En los pacientes con HIC debe aplicarse compresión
neumática intermitente para la prevención del tromboembolismo venoso, además de medias elásticas
(Clase I; Nivel de evidencia B). (No modificada respecto a las guías previas).
6. Tras documentar el cese de la hemorragia, puede
considerarse el uso de dosis bajas de heparina de
bajo peso molecular o heparina no fraccionada subcutánea, para la prevención del tromboembolismo
venoso en pacientes que no tienen movilidad después
de transcurridos de 1 a 4 días tras el inicio (Clase
IIb; Nivel de evidencia B). (Modificada respecto a las
guías previas).
Tabla 6. Directrices recomendadas sugeridas para el tratamiento
de la PA elevada en la HIC espontánea
1. Si la PAS es > 200 mmHg o la PAM es > 150 mmHg, considerar una reducción
 agresiva de la PA con infusión intravenosa continua, con vigilancia frecuente
 de la PA cada 5 minutos.
2. Si la PAS es > 180 mmHg o la PAM es > 130 mmHg y existe la posibilidad de
 una PIC elevada, considerar una vigilancia de la PIC y una reducción de la PA
 con el empleo de medicaciones intravenosas intermitentes o continuas,
 manteniendo al mismo tiempo una presión de perfusión cerebral ≥ 60 mmHg.
3. Si la PAS es > 180 mmHg o la PAM es > 130 mmHg y no hay evidencia de
 elevación de la PIC, considerar una reducción modesta de la PA (por ejemplo,
 PAM de 110 mmHg o un objetivo de PA de 160/90 mmHg) con el empleo de
 medicaciones intravenosas intermitentes o continuas para el control de la PA
 y repetir la exploración clínica del paciente cada 15 minutos.
 Obsérvese que estas recomendaciones son de Clase C. PAS indica presión
arterial sistólica; PAM, presión arterial media.
32 Stroke Abril 2011
Presión arterial
Presión arterial y resultados de la HIC
La presión arterial (PA) está con frecuencia elevada, y a menudo de forma intensa, en los pacientes con una HIC aguda; estas
elevaciones de la PA son mayores que las que se observan en
pacientes con ictus isquémico72,73. Aunque la PA suele reducirse
espontáneamente en unos días tras la HIC, en una parte considerable de pacientes persiste una PA elevada72,73. Los posibles
mecanismos fisiopatológicos incluyen la activación del sistema
neuroendocrino por el estrés (sistema nervioso simpático, eje renina-angiotensina o sistema glucocorticoide) y el aumento de la
presión intracraneal. Teóricamente, la hipertensión arterial podría
contribuir a la expansión hidrostática del hematoma, el edema
peri-hematoma y el resangrado, todo lo cual puede contribuir a
producir los resultados adversos en la HIC, aunque no se ha demostrado claramente una asociación evidente entre la hipertensión arterial en las primeras horas siguientes a la HIC Y el riesgo
de expansión del hematoma (o el volumen final de éste)25,74.
En una revisión sistemática75 y un amplio estudio multicéntrico reciente realizado en China73 se ha observado que un valor de PA sistólica superior a 140 a 150 mmHg en las primeras
12 horas de la HIC se asocia a un riesgo de posterior muerte o
dependencia de más del doble. En comparación con el ictus isquémico, en el que se han observado asociaciones consistentes,
en forma de U o de J, entre los niveles de PA y los malos resultados76, tan solo 1 estudio de la HIC ha mostrado una mala evolución con valores de PA sistólica muy bajos (< 140 mmHg)77.
Tanto para el ictus isquémico como posiblemente para la HIC,
una explicación probable de esta asociación es la causalidad inversa, que hace que los niveles muy bajos de PA se produzcan
de forma desproporcionada en los casos más graves, con lo que
aunque los niveles de PA bajos pueden asociarse a una letalidad
elevada, es posible que la relación no sea realmente causal.
Efectos de los tratamientos de reducción de la PA
Los considerables datos observacionales antes citados y los
estudios de neuroimagen sofisticados que no han logrado identificar una penumbra isquémica en la HIC78 fueron el fundamento del estudio piloto INTensive Blood Pressure Reduction
in Acute Cerebral Hemorrhage Trial (INTERACT), publicado
en 200879. El INTERACT fue un ensayo abierto, aleatorizado
y controlado, llevado a cabo en 404 pacientes principalmente
chinos, que pudieron ser evaluados, tratados y monitorizados
en un plazo de 6 horas tras el inicio de la HIC; A 203 se les
asignó aleatoriamente un tratamiento con fármacos reductores
de la PA intravenosos disponibles localmente, con un objeto
de PA sistólica baja, de 140 mmHg en el plazo de 1 hora, y
se mantuvo durante al menos las 24 horas siguientes, y a 201
se les asignó aleatoriamente un objetivo de PA sistólica más
modesto, de 180 mmHg, según lo recomendado en una guía
previa de la AHA80. El estudio mostró una tendencia a un
crecimiento relativo y absoluto inferior de los volúmenes de
hematoma entre la situación basal y las 24 horas en el grupo
de tratamiento intensivo en comparación con el grupo control.
Además, no hubo un exceso de deterioro neurológico ni otros
acontecimientos adversos relacionados con la reducción intensiva de la PA, ni se observaron diferencias en varias medidas
del resultado clínico, incluida la discapacidad y a la calidad de
vida entre los dos grupos, aunque el ensayo no tuvo la potencia
estadística adecuada para detectar estas diferencias de resultados. El estudio aporta una prueba de concepto importante sobre la reducción temprana de la PA en pacientes con HIC, pero
los datos son insuficientes para recomendar una política definitiva. En otro estudio, el ensayo Antihypertensive Treatment
in Acute Cerebral Hemorrhage (ATACH)81, se ha confirmado
también la viabilidad y seguridad de una reducción rápida y
temprana de la PA en la HIC82. Dicho estudio utilizó una escalada de dosis de cuatro pasos, de reducción de la PA basada
en el uso de nicardipino intravenoso, en 80 pacientes con HIC.
Así pues, se han hecho avances en el conocimiento de los
mecanismos de la HIC y la seguridad de una reducción temprana de la PA tras la publicación de las guías de la HIC de
2007 de la American Heart Association. Los estudios INTERACT y ATACH constituyen en la actualidad la mejor evidencia disponible para orientar las decisiones sobre la reducción de la PA en la HIC. Aunque estos estudios han mostrado
que la reducción intensiva de la PA es clínicamente viable y
potencialmente segura, no están claros todavía cuáles deben
ser el objetivo de PA, la duración del tratamiento y si dicho
tratamiento mejora los resultados clínicos.
Recomendaciones
1. Mientras no se hayan completado los ensayos clínicos en marcha sobre la intervención en la PA para
la HIC, los médicos deben tratar la PA basándose en
la evidencia científica actual incompleta. Las recomendaciones actualmente sugeridas para el objetivo
de PA en diversas situaciones son las que se indican
en la Tabla 6 y puede considerarse su empleo (Clase
IIb; Nivel de evidencia C). (No se ha modificado respecto a las guías previas)
2. En pacientes que presentan inicialmente una PA sistólica de 150 a 220 mmHg, la reducción aguda de la
PA sistólica a 140 mmHg es probablemente segura
(Clase IIa; Nivel de evidencia B). (Nueva recomendación)
Manejo del paciente hospitalizado
y prevención del daño cerebral secundario
Vigilancia general
Los pacientes con HIC se encuentran a menudo en una situación médica y neurológicamente inestable, sobre todo en los
primeros días siguientes al inicio. La asistencia de los pacientes con HIC en una unidad de cuidados intensivos de neurociencias especializada se asocia a una menor tasa de mortalidad83. Debe aplicarse de forma estándar una verificación
frecuente de las constantes vitales, evaluaciones neurológicas
y monitorización cardiorrespiratoria continua, incluido el uso
de un manguito de PA automático en ciclos, telemetría electrocardiográfica y sonda de saturación de oxígeno. Debe considerarse la monitorización continua de la PA intraarterial en los
pacientes tratados con medicaciones vasoactivas intravenosas.
Cuidados de enfermería
Los cuidados de enfermería específicos que necesitan los
pacientes con HIC en unidades de cuidados intensivos pueden incluir lo siguiente: (1) vigilancia y monitorización de
la PIC, presión de perfusión cerebral y función hemodiná-
Morgenstern y cols. Guías para el manejo de la hemorragia intracerebral espontánea 33
mica; (2) ajuste individualizado del tratamiento y aplicación
de protocolos para el manejo de la PIC, PA, ventilación mecánica, fiebre y glucosa sérica; y (3) prevención de complicaciones de la inmovilidad mediante cambios de postura,
mantenimiento de vías aéreas y movilización con tolerancia
fisiológica. El documento de consenso de la Brain Attack
Coalition sobre los centros globales de ictus delimita estas
áreas específicas de monitorización y prevención de complicaciones en las que las enfermeras deben estar capacitadas.
El documento recomienda también que las enfermeras tengan
la formación necesaria para realizar una evaluación detallada
de la función neurológica, incluido el uso de escalas estandarizadas como la National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale, la
GCS y la Glasgow Outcome Scale.
En un estudio del Canadá realizado en 49 hospitales, en el
que se incluyó a pacientes con HIC, la proporción más elevada de enfermeras diplomadas y la mejor comunicación enfermera-médico se asociaron a una mortalidad a 30 días inferior,
incluso tras introducir un ajuste para la gravedad de la enfermedad, las comorbilidades y las características del hospital84.
Recomendación
1. La monitorización y manejo inicial de los pacientes
con HIC deben tener lugar en una unidad cuidados intensivos con médicos y enfermeras con conocimientos de cuidados intensivos de neurociencias
(Clase I; Nivel de evidencia B). (No se ha modificado
respecto a las guías previas)
Manejo de la glucosa
La glucemia elevada al ingreso predice un aumento del riesgo de mortalidad y una mala evolución en los pacientes con
o sin diabetes e HIC85-87. Un ensayo aleatorizado en el que se
demostró una mejora de los resultados con un control estricto
de la glucosa (rango, 80 a 110 mg/dL) con el empleo de infusiones de insulina principalmente en pacientes de cuidados
críticos quirúrgicos88 ha motivado un aumento del uso de este
tratamiento. Sin embargo, estudios más recientes han indicado un aumento de la incidencia de episodios hipoglucémicos
sistémicos y cerebrales y posiblemente incluso un aumento
del riesgo de mortalidad en los pacientes tratados con esta
pauta89-92. En la actualidad, el manejo óptimo de la hiperglucemia en la HIC y el objetivo de glucosa continúan sin haberse aclarado. Debe evitarse la hipoglucemia.
Manejo de la temperatura
La fiebre empeora la evolución en modelos experimentales de
lesión cerebral93,94. La incidencia de fiebre tras una HIC lobular y de ganglios basales es alta, sobre todo en pacientes con
HIV. En los pacientes que sobreviven durante las primeras 72
horas tras el ingreso en el hospital, la duración de la fiebre está
relacionada con el resultado y parece constituir un factor pronóstico independiente en esos pacientes95. Estos datos aportan
un fundamento para el tratamiento agresivo destinado a mantener la normotermia en pacientes con HIC; sin embargo, no
hay datos que relacionen el tratamiento de la fiebre con los resultados. De igual modo, el enfriamiento terapéutico no se ha
investigado de manera sistemática en los pacientes con HIC.
Figura. Algoritmo de tratamiento de la
presión intracraneal. PrePC indica presión
de perfusión cerebral; LCR, líquido cefalorraquídeo. Adaptado de Brain Trauma
Foundation Head Injury Guidelines.126
Copyright 2000, Brain Trauma Foundation.
Bolo de manitol (0,25-1,0 g/kg) o solución hipertónica (23,4% en bolo de 30 cc)
Colocar un monitor de PIC y mantener la
PrePC > 60 mmHg (se prefiere catéter ventricular)
Sedación; bloqueo neuromuscular; considerar
una hiperventilación leve (PaCO2 30-35 mmHg)
Segundos tratamientos, como: hipotermia,
hemicraniectomía, coma barbitúrico
¿PIC > 20-25 mmHg?
¿PIC > 20-25 mmHg?
¿PIC > 20-25 mmHg?
¿PIC > 20-25 mmHg?
Considerar
repetir
la TC
Retirada
escalonada
de tratamientos
para la PIC
Drenaje de LCR (si se dispone de ello)
Sí No
Sí No
Sí No
Sí No
Sí
Sí
Sí
Sí
34 Stroke Abril 2011
Crisis epilépticas y fármacos antiepilépticos
La incidencia descrita de crisis epilépticas clínicas en las 2
primeras semanas siguientes a la HIC ha oscilado entre el
2,7% y el 17%, y la mayor parte se producen en el momento
del inicio o cerca de él96-100. Los estudios de electroencefalografía (EEG) continua han indicado la presencia de crisis
epilépticas en el 28% a 31% de cohortes seleccionadas de
pacientes con HIC, a pesar de que la mayoría recibían medicación anticonvulsivante profiláctica101,102. En un amplio
estudio unicéntrico, los fármacos antiepilépticos profilácticos
redujeron significativamente el número de crisis epilépticas
clínicas tras la HIC lobular98. Sin embargo, en estudios prospectivos de base poblacional, las crisis epilépticas clínicas no
se han asociado a un agravamiento de los resultados neurológicos ni de la mortalidad97,103,104. Tampoco están claras las
repercusiones clínicas de las crisis epilépticas subclínicas detectadas en el EEG. En un reciente análisis del grupo placebo
de un estudio de neuroprotección en la HIC, se observó que
los pacientes que recibieron fármacos antiepilépticos (principalmente fenitoína) sin haber presentado una crisis epiléptica
documentada tuvieron una mayor probabilidad de muerte o
invalidez a los 90 días, tras introducir un ajuste para otros
predictores establecidos del resultado de la HIC105. En otro
reciente estudio unicéntrico, observacional, se obtuvieron
resultados similares, específicamente para fenitoína106. Así
pues, tan solo las crisis epilépticas clínicas o las crisis epilépticas electrográficas con un cambio del estado mental deben
ser tratadas con fármacos antiepilépticos. Debe considerarse
la monitorización continua del EEG en los pacientes con HIC
que presentan una depresión del estado mental desproporcionada respecto al grado de lesión cerebral existente. La utilidad de la medicación anticonvulsivante profiláctica continúa
sin estar clara.
Recomendaciones
Manejo de la glucosa
1. Debe efectuarse una vigilancia de la glucosa y se recomienda la normoglucemia (Clase I: Nivel de evidencia C). (Nueva recomendación)
Crisis epilépticas y fármacos antiepilépticos
1. Las crisis epilépticas clínicas deben tratarse con fármacos antiepilépticos (Clase I; Nivel de evidencia A).
(Modificada respecto a las guías previas) La monitorización continua del EEG está indicada probablemente en los pacientes con HIC y una depresión del
estado mental desproporcionada respecto al grado
de lesión cerebral (Clase IIa; Nivel de evidencia B).
En los pacientes con un cambio del estado mental,
en los que se identifican crisis epilépticas electrográficas en el EEG deben ser tratados con fármacos antiepilépticos (Clase I; Nivel de evidencia C). No debe
utilizarse medicación anticonvulsivante profiláctica
(Clase III; Nivel de evidencia B). (Nueva recomendación)
Hierro
El tratamiento sistémico con el quelante del hierro deferoxamina mejora los cambios inducidos por la HIC en los marcadores del daño del ADN, atenúa el edema cerebral y mejora
la recuperación funcional en modelos de la HIC en la rata107-111. En unos pocos estudios se ha examinado el papel del
hierro en pacientes con HIC y se ha descrito que los niveles
altos de ferritina sérica se asocian a una mala evolución tras
la HIC112 y están correlacionados con el volumen de edema
perihematoma113,114.
La limitación de la toxicidad causada por el hierro es un
objetivo terapéutico prometedor en la HIC. Además de quelar el hierro, deferoxamina muestra otras propiedades neuroprotectoras115. Induce la transcripción de la hemo oxigenasa-1 e inhibe la excitotoxicidad de glutamato mediada por la
hemoglobina y las prolil hidroxilasas o el factor inducible por
hipoxia116-119. Está justificada la realización de nuevos estudios en este campo, pero en la actualidad no puede hacerse
ninguna recomendación terapéutica.
Procedimientos/Cirugía
Monitorización y tratamiento de la PIC
La monitorización de la PIC se utiliza con frecuencia en pacientes con HIC. Sin embargo, tan solo existen datos publicados muy limitados respecto a la frecuencia de la elevación
de la PIC y su manejo en los pacientes con HIC120,121. Existen
evidencias que indican gradientes de presión diferenciales, al
menos en algunos casos, por lo que la PIC puede estar elevada en el hematoma y alrededor de él, pero no a distancia122.
Dado que las causas habituales de PIC elevada son la hidrocefalia por HIV o el efecto masa del hematoma (o el edema
circundante), los pacientes con hematomas pequeños y una
HIV limitada no suelen necesitar un tratamiento para obtener
una PIC inferior.
La PIC se mide con el empleo de dispositivos introducidos
en el parénquima cerebral, habitualmente a la cabecera del
paciente. Puede utilizarse la tecnología de fibra óptica en ambos tipos de dispositivos. Un catéter ventricular (CV) introducido en el ventrículo lateral permite el drenaje de líquido
cefalorraquídeo, que puede facilitar la reducción de la PIC en
pacientes con hidrocefalia. Un dispositivo de PIC mediante
catéter parenquimatoso se introduce en el parénquima cerebral y permite la monitorización de la PIC, pero no el drenaje
de líquido cefalorraquídeo. La falta de estudios publicados
que demuestren que el tratamiento de la PIC elevada afecta
a los resultados de la HIC hace que no esté clara la decisión
a tomar respecto a si monitorizar y tratar la PIC elevada. Los
riesgos asociados a la colocación y uso de un monitor de PIC
son la infección y la hemorragia intracraneal. En general, se
considera que el riesgo de hemorragia o infección es mayor
con el CV que con los catéteres parenquimatosos, aunque los
datos sobre estas tasas no proceden de pacientes con HIC, sino principalmente de pacientes con lesiones cerebrales traumáticas o hemorragias subaracnoideas aneurismáticas. En
una serie de 1997 con un total de 108 dispositivos intraparenquimatosos, la tasa de infecciones fue del 2,9% y la tasa de
hemorragias intracraneales del 2,1% (15,3% en los pacientes
con coagulopatías)123. Se ha publicado una comparación directa de las complicaciones asociadas a cada tipo de dispositivo de monitorización en una serie de 536 dispositivos intracerebrales del periodo 1993 a 1997 (274 CV, 229 catéteres
intraparenquimatosos y 33 dispositivos de otros tipos) en los 
Morgenstern y cols. Guías para el manejo de la hemorragia intracerebral espontánea 35
que la tasa global de infecciones fue del 4% y la tasa global
de hemorragias intracraneales fue del 3%124. Antes de la colocación de un dispositivo de monitorización, es preciso evaluar el estado de la coagulación del paciente. El uso previo de
antiagregantes plaquetarios puede justificar las transfusiones
de plaquetas antes de esa intervención, y el empleo de warfarina puede requerir una reversión de la coagulopatía antes de
la colocación del dispositivo. La decisión de utilizar un CV o
un dispositivo parenquimatoso debe basarse en la necesidad
específica de drenar líquido cefalorraquídeo en los pacientes
con hidrocefalia o un ventrículo atrapado y en la comparación de los riesgos de la monitorización con la utilidad desconocida del manejo de la PIC en los pacientes con HIC.
El tratamiento de la PIC debe orientarse a la causa subyacente, sobre todo si se debe a hidrocefalia o efecto de masa
del hematoma. Teniendo en cuenta los datos limitados existentes respecto a la PIC en la HIC, los principios de manejo
de la PIC elevada se han extrapolado de los de las guías sobre
la lesión cerebral traumática, que hacen hincapié en el mantenimiento de una presión de perfusión cerebral de 50 a 70
mmHg, según el estado de la autorregulación cerebral125,126
(véase la Figura). En los pacientes con HIC que tienen una
puntuación de la GCS ≤  8, en los que presentan evidencia
clínica de herniación transtentorial, y en los que tienen una
HIV significativa o hidrocefalia puede contemplarse una monitorización y tratamiento de la PIC.
Numerosos estudios han evaluado el tamaño ventricular y
los efectos de su agrandamiento sobre los resultados de la
HIC127-130. En un total de 902 pacientes con datos de seguimiento que fueron incluidos en la asignación aleatoria del
ensayo international Surgical Trial of Intracerebral Hemorrhage (STICH) sobre la evacuación temprana del hematoma,
hubo 377 con HIV y 208 de ellos tenían hidrocefalia (23%
del total de pacientes, 55% de ellos con HIV)131. La hidrocefalia predijo un mal resultado en este estudio, al igual que en
otros estudios previos127. Así pues, la hidrocefalia constituye
una causa importante de morbilidad y mortalidad relacionadas con la HIC1, y debe considerarse su tratamiento en pacientes con una reducción del nivel de conciencia.
En series de casos pequeñas se ha descrito el uso de la monitorización del oxígeno del tejido cerebral y la microdiálisis
cerebral en pacientes con HIC132,133. Dado el bajo número de
pacientes y los datos limitados existentes, por el momento
no puede hacerse ninguna recomendación respecto al uso de
estas tecnologías.
Recomendaciones
1. De los pacientes con una puntuación de la GCS de
≤  8, en aquéllos que presentan evidencia clínica de
herniación transtentorial, o en los que tienen una
HIV significativa o hidrocefalia, podría considerarse
una monitorización y tratamiento de la PIC. Puede
ser razonable mantener una presión de perfusión cerebral de 50 a 70 mmHg en función del estado de la
autorregulación cerebral (Clase IIb; Nivel de evidencia C). (Nueva recomendación)
2. El drenaje ventricular como tratamiento para la hidrocefalia es razonable en los pacientes con una reducción del nivel de conciencia (Clase IIa; Nivel de
evidencia B). (Nueva recomendación)
Hemorragia intraventricular
La HIV se produce en un 45% de los pacientes con HIC espontánea134. La HIV puede ser primaria (limitada a los ventrículos) o secundaria (originada como extensión de una HIC).
La mayoría de las HIV son secundarias y están relacionadas
con hemorragias hipertensivas que afectan a los ganglios basales y al tálamo134,135.
Aunque, teóricamente, la introducción de un CV debe facilitar el drenaje de sangre y líquido cefalorraquídeo de los
ventrículos, el uso de un CV solo puede ser ineficaz, dada la
dificultad de mantener la permeabilidad del catéter y la extracción lenta de la sangre intraventricular136. Así pues, recientemente ha habido un gran interés por el uso de agentes
trombolíticos como adyuvantes para el uso de CV en el contexto de la HIV.
Los estudios realizados en animales y las series clínicas
han descrito que la administración intraventricular de agentes
fibrinolíticos, como uroquinasa, estreptoquinasa y activador
de plasminógeno de tipo tisular recombinante, en la HIV,
puede reducir la morbimortalidad al acelerar la eliminación
de la sangre y la lisis del coágulo137-142. Recientemente, el
ensayo Clot Lysis: Evaluating Accelerated Resolution of IVH
(CLEAR-IVH) ha evaluado prospectivamente la seguridad
del empleo abierto de dosis de activador de plasminógeno de
tipo tisular recombinante intraventricular en 52 pacientes con
HIV. Se produjeron hemorragias sintomáticas en un 4% de
los casos y una ventriculitis bacteriana en un 2%, y la mortalidad a 30 días fue del 17%143. La eficacia de este tratamiento
deberá ser confirmada antes de que pueda recomendarse su
uso fuera del ámbito de un ensayo clínico.
Algunos estudios sugieren otros procedimientos alternativos para la HIV, como la evacuación quirúrgica endoscópica y la ventriculostomía144-146, la derivación ventriculoperitoneal147 o el drenaje lumbar para la hidrocefalia148. Existen
pocos datos que respalden estas estrategias.
Recomendación
1. Aunque la administración intraventricular de activador de plasminógeno de tipo tisular recombinante
en la HIV parece tener una tasa de complicaciones
bastante baja, la eficacia y la seguridad de este tratamiento no están claras y se considera una terapia
en fase de investigación (Clase IIb; Nivel de evidencia
B). (Nueva recomendación)
Extracción del coágulo
Tratamiento quirúrgico de la HIC
La decisión de realizar o no una extracción quirúrgica de la
HIC y de cuándo hacerlo continúa siendo controvertida. La
fisiopatología de la lesión cerebral alrededor del hematoma
se debe a los efectos mecánicos de la masa de sangre creciente, así como a los efectos tóxicos posteriores de la sangre en
el tejido cerebral circundante. Una intervención quirúrgica
temprana para limitar la compresión mecánica del cerebro y
los efectos tóxicos de la sangre pueden limitar la lesión, pero
los riesgos quirúrgicos en un paciente con una hemorragia
continuada pueden ser mayores. Además, en todas las hemorragias excepto las más superficiales, la extracción operatoria
de la hemorragia mediante craneotomía comporta un corte 
36 Stroke Abril 2011
a través de tejido no dañado. Entre las limitaciones de los
ensayos de la cirugía en la HIC se encuentra la de que era
improbable que se incluyera en la asignación aleatoria del
tratamiento a pacientes jóvenes o de mediana edad con riesgo
de herniación. Las recomendaciones para esos pacientes no
están claras.
Craneotomía según la localización de la HIC
La mayor parte, aunque no la totalidad149 de los ensayos aleatorizados de la cirugía de la HIC excluyeron a los pacientes
con HIC cerebelosa, que constituyen un 10% a 15% de los
casos. En las versiones previas de estas guías6
 se citaban estudios no aleatorizados que indicaban que los pacientes con
HIC cerebelosa de más de 3 cm de diámetro o los que tenían
una compresión del tronco encefálico o hidrocefalia, presentaban un buen resultado con la cirugía destinada a extraer el
hematoma, mientras que en pacientes similares tratados médicamente, el resultado fue malo150-155. Si la hemorragia es de
un diámetro < 3 cm, y no hay compresión del tronco encefálico ni hidrocefalia, pueden conseguirse resultados razonables sin cirugía. A pesar de que no se han realizado ensayos
aleatorizados de la evaluación de hematomas cerebelosos, las
diferencias de los resultados en los estudios previos son tales
que no existe un equilibrio clínico para un ensayo. Además,
el uso de un CV solo en vez de una evacuación inmediata del
hematoma cerebeloso se considera generalmente insuficiente
y no se recomienda, en especial en los pacientes con compresión de cisternas155.
En el ensayo STICH se observó que los pacientes con hematomas que se extendían hasta una distancia de menos de
1 cm de la superficie cortical presentaban una tendencia a
un resultado favorable de la cirugía en un plazo de 96 horas,
aunque esta observación no alcanzaba significación estadística (odds ratio, 0,69; intervalo de confianza del 95%, 0,47
a 1,01)156. Los pacientes con hemorragias lobulares y una
puntuación de la GCS de 9 a 12 mostraron también un mejor resultado. Dado que el efecto beneficioso de la cirugía en
los pacientes con HIC superficiales no fue estadísticamente
significativo tras introducir un ajuste para pruebas múltiples,
los autores recomendaron la realización de nuevos ensayos
clínicos para confirmar este efecto favorable157.
En cambio, los pacientes del estudio STICH con una HIC
situada a > 1 cm de la superficie cortical o con una puntuación de la GCS ≤ 8 tendieron a presentar una peor evolución
con la extracción quirúrgica en comparación con el tratamiento médico. En otro estudio aleatorizado de 108 pacientes
con HIC supratentorial subcortical o putaminal, de un volumen > 30 mL, se asignó a los pacientes una craneotomía o un
tratamiento médico en un plazo de 8 horas tras el inicio158. La
obtención de un buen resultado (buena recuperación o discapacidad moderada en la Glasgow Outcome Scale al cabo de
1 año) fue significativamente mejor en los pacientes tratados
con cirugía, pero no hubo diferencias en la supervivencia global. En otros ensayos aleatorizados, el número de pacientes
ha sido demasiado bajo para poder determinar los resultados
en subgrupos definidos según la localización, se incluyó tan
solo a pacientes con HIC profundas, o no se presentan estos
resultados159-161. El entusiasmo por la evacuación quirúrgica
de la HIC talámica y pontina ha sido limitado154,162,163.
Extracción quirúrgica mínimamente invasiva
de la HIC
Si las indicaciones para la evacuación quirúrgica de los hematomas intracerebrales son controvertidas, ello implica que
la forma en la que se realiza esta evacuación está aún menos
claramente establecida. Varios grupos han desarrollado técnicas mínimamente invasivas de extracción de los coágulos.
Estas técnicas tienden a utilizar una guía estereotáctica combinada con una aspiración potenciada mediante trombolíticos
o mediante endoscopia. Tanto los ensayos aleatorizados de la
aspiración potenciada con trombolíticos para la HIC subcortical149,161,164 como los de la aspiración potenciada con endoscopia165–167 con o sin estereotaxia han descrito un aumento de
la extracción del coágulo y una reducción de la mortalidad en
los pacientes tratados quirúrgicamente en un plazo de 12 a 72
horas, pero no se ha demostrado de manera consistente una
mejora de los resultados funcionales.
Momento de aplicación de la cirugía
Una cuestión clave ha sido la falta de consenso respecto al
marco temporal de lo que constituye una cirugía temprana.
En los estudios clínicos se ha descrito una amplia variabilidad en cuanto al momento de aplicación de la cirugía, que
va de las 4 primeras horas a las 96 horas desde el inicio de
los síntomas hasta el momento de la operación156,158,161,168.
Estas diferencias temporales entre los distintos estudios han
dificultado la comparación directa y el análisis de las consecuencias del momento elegido para la operación. En una serie retrospectiva japonesa de extracciones quirúrgicas de 100
HIC putaminales en las 7 horas siguientes al inicio (60 de
ellas en las 3 primeras horas), se describió un resultado mejor
que el esperado169. Sin embargo, en posteriores ensayos aleatorizados de pacientes tratados en un plazo de 12 horas tras
el inicio, los resultados fueron diversos158,161,168. Se observó
un aumento del riesgo de resangrado en un ensayo pequeño
de pacientes aleatorizados en las 4 primeras horas siguientes
al inicio170.
Los ensayos en los que la aleatorización de los pacientes
se ha realizado en un plazo de 24 horas171, 48 horas159,165, 72
horas149,160 y 96 horas156 o no han mostrado tampoco ningún
efecto beneficioso claro de la cirugía en comparación con el
tratamiento médico inicial, excepto por una mejora de los resultados en el subgrupo de pacientes del ensayo STICH con
HIC superficiales y una disminución de la mortalidad en los
pacientes con hemorragias subcorticales tratados con métodos mínimamente invasivos en un plazo de 12 a 72 horas,
según se ha indicado antes.
Recomendaciones
1. En la mayoría de los pacientes con HIC, la utilidad
de la cirugía no está clara (Clase IIb; Nivel de evidencia C). (Nueva recomendación) Se indican a continuación las excepciones específicas a esa recomendación
2. En los pacientes con hemorragia cerebelosa que sufren un deterioro neurológico o que presentan una
compresión de tronco encefálico y/o hidrocefalia por
obstrucción ventricular, debe realizarse una extracción quirúrgica de la hemorragia lo antes posible
(Clase I; Nivel de evidencia B). (Modificada respecto
a las guías previas) No se recomienda el tratamien-
Morgenstern y cols. Guías para el manejo de la hemorragia intracerebral espontánea 37
to inicial de estos pacientes con drenaje ventricular
solo en vez de la evacuación quirúrgica (Clase III;
Nivel de evidencia C). (Nueva recomendación)
3. En los pacientes con hemorragias lobulares de un
volumen > 30 mL y situados a una distancia de menos de 1 cm de la superficie, cabría considerar una
evacuación de la HIC supratentorial mediante craneotomía estándar (Clase IIb; Nivel de evidencia B).
(Modificada respecto a las guías previas)
4. La efectividad de la evacuación mínimamente invasiva del coágulo, con el empleo de aspiración estereotáctica o endoscópica, con o sin uso de trombolíticos,
es incierta y se considera en fase de investigación (Clase IIb; Nivel de evidencia B). (Nueva recomendación)
5. Aunque teóricamente parece atractiva, actualmente
no hay ninguna evidencia clara que indique que la
extracción ultra-temprana de la HIC supratentorial
mejore los resultados funcionales o la tasa de mortalidad. Una craneotomía muy temprana puede ser
nociva, dado el aumento de riesgo de hemorragia recurrente (Clase III; Nivel de evidencia B). (Modificada respecto a las guías previas)
Predicción de los resultados y retirada
del apoyo tecnológico
Muchos estudios observacionales y epidemiológicos han
identificado una amplia variedad de factores que predicen los
resultados tras una HIC aguda. A partir de estos estudios se
han elaborado numerosos modelos de predicción de los resultados de mortalidad y capacidad funcional. Las características
identificadas en la mayoría de estos modelos de predicción
incluyen características de los pacientes individuales como
la puntuación en la GCS o la National Institutes of Health
Stroke Scale, edad, volumen y localización del hematoma,
y presencia y cantidad de HIV12,172-180. Sin embargo, no hay
ningún modelo de predicción que haya tenido en cuenta el
impacto de las limitaciones de la asistencia como la orden
médica de no reanimar o la retirada del apoyo tecnológico.
En la mayoría de casos de muerte de pacientes por HIC,
esto ocurre durante la hospitalización aguda inicial, y estas
muertes suelen producirse en el contexto de la retirada de los
apoyos tecnológicos a causa de un mal pronóstico181,182. Sin
embargo, ahora hay varios estudios que han identificado la
retirada del apoyo médico y otras limitaciones tempranas en
la asistencia, como las órdenes de no reanimar en el primer
día de hospitalización, como factores predictivos del resultado independientes2,183,184. Es probable que los actuales modelos de predicción de los resultados, así como los métodos
más informales de pronóstico temprano tras la HIC, estén segados por el hecho de no tener en cuenta estas limitaciones
de la asistencia. Se ha expresado cierta preocupación respecto a que las decisiones de los médicos de limitar la asistencia de la HIC de forma temprana puedan estar produciendo
una profecía autocumplida de malos resultados a causa de un
pronóstico pesimista inexacto y la falta de aplicación de un
tratamiento agresivo temprano en los pacientes con una HIC
grave que tienen, no obstante, la posibilidad de presentar una
evolución favorable.
Aunque, por definición, la orden de no reanimar implica
que no debe hacerse ningún intento de reanimación en el caso
de que se produzca un paro cardiorrespiratorio, en la práctica,
cuando se aplica de forma temprana tras una HIC, esto equivale a una ausencia global de agresividad en la asistencia2.
Ello implica que la agresividad global de la asistencia de la
HIC en un hospital puede ser un factor crucial para determinar los resultados de los pacientes, con independencia de sus
características individuales específicas2,83,185.
Aunque el pronóstico temprano tras la HIC pueda ser deseado por médicos, pacientes y familiares, se basa en un fundamento incierto. Dada esta incertidumbre y la posibilidad de
profecías autocumplidas de un mal resultado, hay que tener
gran precaución al intentar establecer un pronóstico temprano
tras la HIC, sobre todo si el objetivo es considerar la retirada
de los apoyos tecnológicos o una orden de no reanimar186. Así
pues, se recomienda un tratamiento agresivo según las guías en
todos los pacientes con HIC que no han establecido voluntades
anticipadas que especifiquen que no deba ser así. Los médicos
encargados no deben recomendar limitaciones de la asistencia
como órdenes de no reanimar o retirada de los apoyos tecnológicos durante los primeros días siguientes a una HIC.
Recomendación
1. Probablemente deba recomendarse una asistencia
plena agresiva de forma temprana tras el inicio de
la HIC y posponer las órdenes de no reanimar al menos hasta completado el segundo día de hospitalización (Clase IIa; Nivel de evidencia B). No se incluye
en esta recomendación a los pacientes con órdenes
de no reanimar preexistentes. Los métodos actuales
para establecer el pronóstico de pacientes individuales de forma temprana tras una HIC están probablemente sesgados por no tener en cuenta la influencia
de la retirada de los apoyos tecnológicos y las órdenes de no reanimar tempranas. Los pacientes en los
que se establece en cualquier momento una orden
de no reanimar, deben recibir todas las demás intervenciones médicas y quirúrgicas apropiadas, salvo
que se indique lo contrario de forma explícita. (Modificada respecto a las guías previas)
Prevención de la HIC recurrente
Los estudios de base poblacional de pacientes que han
sobrevivido a un primer ictus hemorrágico han identificado tasas de HIC recurrentes del 2,1% al 3,7% por pacienteaño187,188, que son sustancialmente superiores a la tasa de ictus isquémicos posteriores de estos individuos.
El factor de riesgo identificado de manera más uniforme
para la HIC recurrente es la localización lobular de la HIC
inicial187,189. Esta observación corresponde probablemente a
la asociación de la angiopatía amiloide cerebral con la localización lobular y un aumento de la recurrencia190,191. Las hemorragias en localizaciones características de la vasculopatía
hipertensiva, como ganglios basales, tálamo o tronco encefálico192, presentan también recurrencias, aunque con menos
frecuencia. Otros factores ligados a la recurrencia de la HIC
en algunos estudios son los siguientes: edad más avanzada188,
anticoagulación post-HIC188, hemorragia previa antes de la
HIC actual191, estado de portador de alelos de la apolipopro-
38 Stroke Abril 2011
teína E ε2 o ε4191,193, y mayor número de microhemorragias
en la RM de gradiente-eco con ponderación T2*194.
La hipertensión arterial es el factor de riesgo modificable más
importante en la actualidad para la prevención de la recurrencia
de la HIC195,196. La importancia del control de la PA ha sido respaldada por los datos del estudio Perindopril Protection Against
Recurrent Stroke Study (PROGRESS), que ponen de manifiesto
que los sujetos con una asignación aleatoria al tratamiento de
perindopril más indapamida opcional presentaron un riesgo de
una primera HIC significativamente inferior ( ajustada, 0,44;
intervalo de confianza del 95%, 0,28 a 0,69) y una reducción
similar, aunque sin significación estadística, de la HIC recurrente (razón de riesgos ajustada, 0,37; intervalo de confianza del
95%, 0,10 a 1,38)193. Es de destacar que esta reducción parecía
darse en las HIC tanto lobulares como hemisféricas profundas.
Aunque no existen datos específicos sobre la PA óptima para
reducir la recurrencia de la HIC, un objetivo razonable es una
PA < 140/90 (o < 130/80 en presencia de diabetes o enfermedad
renal crónica), según lo sugerido por el informe más reciente del
Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation,
and Treatment of High Blood Pressure197.
La anticoagulación oral se asocia a una peor evolución de la
HIC198,199 y a un aumento del riesgo de recurrencia188, lo cual
plantea la cuestión de si los beneficios de la anticoagulación
para la prevención del tromboembolismo superan a sus riesgos tras la HIC inicial. Para un varón hipotético de 69 años de
edad, con fibrilación auricular no valvular y con antecedentes
previos de una HIC lobular, un modelo de Markov predijo que
una anticoagulación a largo plazo reduciría la supervivencia
ajustada por su calidad, a causa del riesgo elevado de recurrencia tras la HIC lobular200. Los resultados de la anticoagulación tras una HIC hemisférica profunda fueron menos claros
y variaban en función de los supuestos establecidos respecto al
riesgo de episodios futuros de tromboembolismo o HIC. Los
efectos de los antiagregantes plaquetarios sobre la recurrencia
y la gravedad de la HIC parecen ser sustancialmente inferiores
a los de la anticoagulación16,62,189,201, lo cual sugiere que el tratamiento antiagregante plaquetario puede ser una alternativa
más segura a la anticoagulación tras la HIC. Recientemente,
el estudio ACTIVE A (Atrial Fibrillation Clopidogrel Trial
with Irbesartan for Prevention of Vascular Events–Aspirin) ha
descrito un ensayo aleatorizado y doble ciego de la seguridad y
eficacia de la adición de clopidogrel en dosis de 75 mg al día al
uso de ácido acetilsalicílico en dosis de 75 a 100 mg en los pacientes con fibrilación auricular de alto riesgo y una contraindicación para el empleo de warfarina. Aunque la HIC previa se
mencionó como una de las principales razones de inclusión en
el estudio, los autores no indicaron la proporción de pacientes
con HIC previas, y por tanto los resultados del estudio no son
directamente aplicables a los pacientes con unos antecedentes previos de HIC. Los pacientes que recibieron clopidogrel
además del ácido acetilsalicílico presentaron una reducción de
riesgo absoluto de eventos vasculares de un 0,8% anual a un
coste del 0,7% por año de aumento de los episodios de hemorragia mayor202.
El reciente estudio Stroke Prevention with Aggressive Reductions in Cholesterol Levels (SPARCL) ha observado un aumento del riesgo de una posterior HIC (razón de riesgos sin ajustar,
1,68; intervalo de confianza del 95%, 1,09 a 2,59) en individuos
con un ictus previo aleatorizados a atorvastatina a dosis altas203.
Continúa sin estar claro si este efecto contrarresta el efecto favorable que tiene el tratamiento con estatinas de reducción de
eventos isquémicos cardiacos y cerebrales en los pacientes que
han sobrevivido a una HIV. El consumo frecuente de alcohol
(definido en el estudio Greater Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky
como > 2 bebidas al día) se ha relacionado con un aumento del
riesgo de HIC204 y, por tanto, es razonable evitar este consumo
después de una HIC. Otras conductas, como el ejercicio físico, la
actividad sexual o el estrés, no se han relacionado con la HIC205,
aunque son pocos los datos sistemáticos presentados al respecto.
Recomendaciones
1. En situaciones en las que la estratificación del riesgo de HIC recurrente de un paciente puede afectar
a otras decisiones terapéuticas, es razonable considerar los siguientes factores de riesgo para la recurrencia: localización lobular de la HIC inicial, edad
más avanzada, uso de anticoagulación, presencia de
los alelos de la apolipoproteína E ε2 o ε4 y mayor
número de microhemorragias en la RM (Clase IIa;
Nivel de evidencia B). (Nueva recomendación)
2. Tras el periodo agudo de la HIC, si no hay contraindicaciones médicas, debe obtenerse un buen control
de la PA, en especial en los pacientes con una localización de la HIC característica de la vasculopatía
hipertensiva (Clase I; Nivel de evidencia A). (Nueva
recomendación)
3. Tras el periodo agudo de la HIC, es razonable un
objetivo de PA normal de < 140/90 (< 130/80 si hay
diabetes o enfermedad renal crónica) (Clase IIa; Nivel de evidencia B). (Nueva recomendación)
4. Probablemente convenga recomendar la evitación de la anticoagulación a largo plazo como tratamiento para la fibrilación auricular no valvular
tras una HIC lobular espontánea, debido al riesgo
relativamente alto de recurrencia (Clase IIa; Nivel
de evidencia B). La anticoagulación tras una HIC no
lobular y el tratamiento antiagregante plaquetario
después de cualquier HIC podrían considerarse, sobre todo cuando existen indicaciones claras para estos fármacos (Clase IIb; Nivel de evidencia B). (No se
ha modificado respecto a las guías previas)
5. La evitación del consumo intenso de alcohol puede
ser beneficiosa (Clase IIa; Nivel de evidencia B). Los
datos existentes son insuficientes para recomendar
restricciones sobre el uso de estatinas o la actividad
física o sexual (Clase IIb; Nivel de evidencia C). (Nueva recomendación)
Rehabilitación y recuperación
El conocimiento de las diferencias existentes en la evolución natural de los patrones de recuperación y el pronóstico
de discapacidad residual y de función entre la HIC y el ictus
isquémico se ve dificultado por la tasa de HIC muy inferior
a la del ictus isquémico y la consideración de la hemorragia
subaracnoidea y la HIC de forma conjunta en muchos estudios. También hay problemas asociados a la insensibilidad
de muchos de los parámetros de valoración utilizados en la
rehabilitación para permitir la detección de diferencias clíni-
Morgenstern y cols. Guías para el manejo de la hemorragia intracerebral espontánea 39
camente significativas entre los grupos. Aun así, hay alguna
evidencia que indica que los pacientes con HIC pueden tener
una recuperación ligeramente superior y más rápida206-208 que
la de los pacientes con ictus isquémico.
En general, la recuperación es más rápida en las primeras
semanas, pero puede continuar durante muchos meses después de la HIC208,209, de tal manera que aproximadamente la
mitad de los supervivientes continúan siendo dependientes
de otras personas para las actividades de la vida diaria176. Sin
embargo, la rapidez y el grado de recuperación varían en los
distintos pacientes, y no hay una regla general para poder
establecer cuándo ha terminado la recuperación. La función
cognitiva, el estado de ánimo, la motivación y el apoyo social
son factores que influyen en la recuperación, y resulta difícil
separar la recuperación intrínseca de la adaptativa. Se ha demostrado que una puntuación pronóstica sencilla, basada en
la edad, volumen y localización de la HIC, nivel de conciencia al ingreso y deterioro cognitivo previo a la HIC predice la
independencia a los 90 días176. Dado que la HIC se encuentra
a menudo en regiones lobulares y se complica con una extensión intraventricular, algunos pacientes con deficiencias
cognitivas específicas o un retraso en la recuperación desproporcionado respecto al tamaño de la lesión pueden requerir
un tratamiento de rehabilitación especializado.
En los últimos años se ha prestado considerable atención
a la creación de servicios de rehabilitación del ictus. Esto representa en parte una necesidad de individualizar los servicios para asegurar una recuperación óptima en los pacientes que
se debe en parte a las presiones fiscales respecto a los servicios
sanitarios costosos. Dada la clara evidencia que indica un
beneficio con el empleo de una asistencia bien organizada y
multidisciplinaria de los pacientes hospitalizados (unidad de
ictus) en cuanto a mejora de la supervivencia, recuperación
y regreso al domicilio, en comparación con las salas de ictus
convencionales no especializadas210, se han hecho grandes
esfuerzos por extender este modelo de servicio de asistencia
coordinada a la comunidad. Concretamente, el alta hospitalaria temprana con apoyo y los programas de rehabilitación de
base domiciliaria han resultado coste-efectivos210, mientras
que se ha demostrado que el tratamiento domiciliario en pacientes estables produce unos resultados comparables a los
de la rehabilitación ambulatoria convencional211. El éxito
de estos programas depende de la formación y el apoyo de
los cuidadores. Sin embargo, la configuración probable de
los servicios de rehabilitación del ictus en cualquier región
dependerán de los recursos disponibles y de las opciones de
financiación existentes. Un elemento clave de la rehabilitación debe ser la educación sanitaria del paciente y el cuidador
respecto a la prevención secundaria del ictus y las formas de
alcanzar los objetivos de rehabilitación. Los programas de rehabilitación deben contemplar los cambios del estilo de vida,
la depresión y la carga de los cuidadores como cuestiones importantes sobre las que actuar con el paciente y el cuidador.
Recomendaciones
1. Dado el posible carácter grave y el patrón complejo
de la discapacidad en evolución, parece razonable
que todos los pacientes con HIC tengan acceso a una
rehabilitación multidisciplinaria (Clase IIa; Nivel de
evidencia B). Cuando sea posible, la rehabilitación
puede ser beneficiosa cuando se inicia lo antes posible y se continúa en la comunidad, como parte de un
programa bien coordinado (integrado) de alta hospitalaria acelerada y reinstalación domiciliaria para
fomentar una recuperación continuada (Clase IIa;
Nivel de evidencia B). (Nueva recomendación)
Consideraciones futuras
El futuro del tratamiento de la HIC se centra en un conjunto de
objetivos. El primero es claramente la prevención. Es probable
que los proyectos de base comunitaria destinados a reducir la
PA a través de estilos de vida saludables y mejora de la adherencia a la medicación sean muy eficaces para reducir la incidencia de HIC212. Los estudios en animales destinados a prevenir la angiopatía amiloide cerebral son prometedores213,214.
Una vez se ha producido la HIC, los esfuerzos por movilizar a la comunidad para facilitar un tratamiento inmediato
son similares a los que se hacen para el tratamiento agudo
del ictus isquémico215. Las exploraciones de imagen avanzadas permiten identificar actualmente a los pacientes con una
hemorragia y aportan un objetivo para la mejor selección de
los pacientes para las pruebas de agentes hemostásicos28. La
eficacia de los agentes hemostásicos debe contraponerse claramente con el posible riesgo trombótico arterial y venoso.
Teóricamente, el control de la PA puede reducir el crecimiento del hematoma y/o el edema cerebral. Los estudios iniciales sugieren que es viable un estudio aleatorizado y controlado de reducción de la PA79,81. La seguridad y la eficacia
están pendientes de demostrar en estudios más amplios.
Hay una activa investigación sobre las posibilidades de interferir en la lesión oxidativa después de la HIC. Los agentes
quelantes del hierro, como deferoxamina, están siendo estudiados en ensayos de fases iniciales107,115. Las vías que giran
en torno a los factores inducibles por hipoxia y las prolil hidrolasas aportan nuevas posibles dianas para la intervención
centrada en el estrés oxidativo216. El papel de la microglía
y los macrófagos en la resolución del hematoma está recibiendo una atención creciente217. La autofagia puede ser un
proceso celular modificable para prevenir la muerte celular
relacionada con la HIC218.
Es probable que haya muchos factores que contribuyan a
causar la lesión tras la HIC, como el efecto masa, la toxicidad
relacionada con la sangre y el desplazamiento del tejido subyacente. Al parecer una solución sencilla es la extracción del
hematoma. Sin embargo, hasta la fecha, la cirugía no ha sido la
panacea para este trastorno. En la actualidad se están estudiando otros métodos con el empleo de técnicas quirúrgicas mínimamente invasivas que pueden eliminar los efectos tóxicos de
la sangre y la presión, al tiempo que evitan la lesión causada
por las intervenciones más invasivas, así como nuevos tratamientos para disolver y drenar la sangre intraventricular143,164.
Las prioridades en la investigación de la HIC han sido objeto de una amplia revisión y publicación13. Un enfoque agresivo y de colaboración de la investigación básica y clínica
en este campo fomentará probablemente el máximo rendimiento. Mientras tanto, parece claro que nuestra capacidad
de establecer el pronóstico de la HIC es limitada184, y que en
una asistencia agresiva ahora, junto con la esperanza para el
futuro, están claramente indicadas. 
40 Stroke Abril 2011
Declaración de conflictos de intereses
Declaraciones del grupo de redacción
Miembro
del grupo de
redacción Empleo Subvención de investigación
Otro apoyo de
investigación
Panel de
conferenciantes/
honorarios
Testimonio
de experto
Intereses en la
propiedad
Consultor/consejo
asesor Otros
Lewis B.
Morgenstern
University of
Michigan
NIH (R01 NS057127)
Consultor—Seguridad y
tolerabilidad de deferoxamina en
la hemorrragia cerebral aguda
(estudio de fármaco genérico)*;
NINDS (U01 NS052510) Co-I
(Tratamiento con deferoxamina
para la hemorragia
intracerebral—subvención
traslacional de la investigación
animal que examina el uso
de deferoxamina genérica en
la HIC)†; NIH (R01 NS38916)
IP—Brain Attack Surveillance
in Corpus Christi (estudio
observacional del ictus en una
comunidad biétnica)†
No No No No No Miembro del
consejo de
adjudicación
médica,
Wyeth*
Craig Anderson George Institute,
Sydney,
Australia
The Australian National Health
& Medical Research Council
(empleador); becario de
investigación principal sénior
(632918); subvención de
programa (571281); subvención
de proyecto (estudio INTERACT
2—512402) †; NINDS (IMSIII
Ensayo 1 V01 NSO52220-02;
sub-subvención SRS#19449
SAP-G100121-1005817)†; FIA
(RO1NS39512 R-01-NS 36695)†
No BoehringerIngelheim*;
Servier*; SanofiAventis*
No No BoehringerIngelheim*
No
Kyra Becker University of
Washington
No No No No No No No
Joseph P.
Broderick
University of
Cincinnati
NINDS R-01 NS36695
(Factores de riesgo genéticos
y ambientales para el
ictus hemorrágico—Coinvestigador)†; NIH/NINDS (P50
SPOTRIAS NS44283—IP de
PPG)†
Novo Nordisk
proporciona
Factor VIIa
para el ensayo
STOP-IT
financiado por
el NINDS*
No No No No No
E. Sander
Connolly, Jr
Columbia
University
No No No No No No No
Steven M.
Greenberg
Massachusetts
General Hospital
NIH (R01 NS057127,
consultor)—Seguridad y
tolerabilidad de deferoxamina
en la hemorragia cerebral aguda
(estudio de fármaco genérico)†
No No No No No No
J. Claude
Hemphill III
University of
California at
San Francisco
NIH/NINDS; U10 NS058931
(PI)†; (SF-NET: San Francisco
Neurological Emergencies
Trials Network—red nacional
de ensayos clínicos de fase
III—ningún ensayo actual sobre
la HIC); Novo Nordisk (PI)†
No No No No Novo Nordisk* No
James N.
Huang
University of
California at
San Francisco
No Prospective
Advate ITI
Registry
(PAIR) Estudio
patrocinado
por Baxter (IP
local—UCSF)*
No No No No No
(Continúa) 
Morgenstern y cols. Guías para el manejo de la hemorragia intracerebral espontánea 41
Declaraciones del grupo de redacción Continuación
Miembro
del grupo de
redacción Empleo Subvención de investigación
Otro apoyo de
investigación
Panel de
conferenciantes/
honorarios
Testimonio
de experto
Intereses en la
propiedad
Consultor/consejo
asesor Otros
R. Loch
Macdonald
University of
Toronto
Physicians Services, Inc.
Subvención de investigación
para el estudio de la hemorragia
subaracnoidea†
No No No Edge
Therapeutics*
Actelion
Pharmaceuticals
(estudio de la
hemorragia
subaranoidea)*
No
Steven R.
Messé
University of
Pennsylvania
No No BoehringerIngelheim*
No No No No
Pamela H.
Mitchell
University of
Washington
No No No No No No No
Magdy Selim Beth Israel NIH (R01 NS057127)—
Seguridad y tolerabilidad de
deferoxamina en la hemorragia
cerebral aguda (estudio del
fármaco genérico)†
No No No No No No
Rafael J.
Tamargo
Johns Hopkins
University
No No No No No No No
En esta tabla se indican las relaciones de los miembros del grupo de redacción que pueden ser percibidas como conflictos de intereses reales o razonablemente percibidos según lo declarado en el Cuestionario de Conflictos de Intereses, que todos los miembros del grupo de redacción deben completar y presentar. Una relación se considera “significativa” si: 1) la persona
recibe 10.000 dólares o más durante algún período de 12 meses, o bien un 5% o más de sus ingresos brutos; o 2) la persona posee un 5% o más de las acciones con derecho a voto de la
entidad, o posee 10.000 dólares o más del valor de mercado de la entidad. Una relación se considera “modesta” si es inferior a la “significativa” según la anterior definición.
*Modesta.
†Significativa.
Declaraciones de los revisores
Revisor Empleo Subvención de investigación
Otro apoyo de
investigación
Panel de
conferenciantes/
honorarios
Testimonio
de experto
Intereses en la
propiedad
Consultor/consejo
asesor Otros
Tamilyn Bakas Indiana
University
Purdue
University
Indianapolis
No No No No No No No
John Cole University of
Maryland
No No No No No No No
Matthew
Flaherty
University of
Cincinnati
Academic
Health Center
No No No No No No No
Karen C.
Johnston
University of
Virginia
NIH-NINDS R01 NS050192
ensayo GRASP†
No Múltiples sesiones
nacionales sobre
el ictus*
No No Diffussion
Pharmaceuticals,
Inc.*; Remedy
Pharmaceuticals,
Inc.*
AAN como
editor
asociado de
neurología
hasta julio de
2009†
Christina
Stewart-Amidei
University of
Central Florida
No No No No No No No
Greg Zipfel Washington
University
No No No No No No No
En esta tabla se indican las relaciones de los revisores que pueden ser percibidas como conflictos de intereses reales o razonablemente percibidos según lo declarado en el Cuestionario
de Conflictos de Intereses, que todos los revisores deben completar y presentar. Una relación se considera “significativa” si: a) la persona recibe 10.000 dólares o más durante algún período
de 12 meses, o bien un 5% o más de sus ingresos brutos; o b) la persona posee un 5% o más de las acciones con derecho a voto de la entidad, o posee 10.000 dólares o más del valor de
mercado de la entidad. Una relación se considera “modesta” si es inferior a la “significativa” según la anterior definición.
*Modesta
†Significativa. 
42 Stroke Abril 2011
Bibliografía
1. Zahuranec DB, Gonzales NR, Brown DL, Lisabeth LD, Longwell PJ,
Eden SV, Smith MA, Garcia NM, Hoff JT, Morgenstern LB. Presentation of intracerebral haemorrhage in a community. J Neurol Neurosurg
Psychiatry. 2006;77:340 –344.
2. Hemphill JC 3rd, Newman J, Zhao S, Johnston SC. Hospital usage of
early do-not-resuscitate orders and outcome after intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 2004;35:1130 –1134.
3. Flaherty ML, Woo D, Haverbusch M, Sekar P, Khoury J, Sauerbeck L,
Moomaw CJ, Schneider A, Kissela B, Kleindorfer D, Broderick JP.
Racial variations in location and risk of intracerebral hemorrhage.
Stroke. 2005;36:934 –937.
4. Sacco S, Marini C, Toni D, Olivieri L, Carolei A. Incidence and 10-year
survival of intracerebral hemorrhage in a population-based registry.
Stroke. 2009;40:394 –399.
5. Roach ES, Golomb MR, Adams R, Biller J, Daniels S, Deveber G,
Ferriero D, Jones BV, Kirkham FJ, Scott RM, Smith ER. Management
of stroke in infants and children: a scientific statement from a Special
Writing Group of the American Heart Association Stroke Council and
the Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young. Stroke. 2008;39:
2644 –2691.
6. Broderick J, Connolly S, Feldmann E, Hanley D, Kase C, Krieger D,
Mayberg M, Morgenstern L, Ogilvy CS, Vespa P, Zuccarello M.
Guidelines for the management of spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage in adults: 2007 update: a guideline from the American Heart
Association/American Stroke Association Stroke Council, High Blood
Pressure Research Council, and the Quality of Care and Outcomes in
Research Interdisciplinary Working Group. Stroke. 2007;38:2001–2023.
7. Moon JS, Janjua N, Ahmed S, Kirmani JF, Harris-Lane P, Jacob M,
Ezzeddine MA, Qureshi AI. Prehospital neurologic deterioration in
patients with intracerebral hemorrhage. Crit Care Med. 2008;36:
172–175.
8. Brott T, Broderick J, Kothari R, Barsan W, Tomsick T, Sauerbeck L,
Spilker J, Duldner J, Khoury J. Early hemorrhage growth in patients
with intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 1997;28:1–5.
9. Abdullah AR, Smith EE, Biddinger PD, Kalenderian D, Schwamm LH.
Advance hospital notification by EMS in acute stroke is associated with
shorter door-to-computed tomography time and increased likelihood of
administration of tissue-plasminogen activator. Prehosp Emerg Care.
2008;12:426 – 431.
10. Leira R, Da´valos A, Silva Y, Gil-Peralta A, Tejada J, Garcia M, Castillo
J; Stroke Project, Cerebrovascular Diseases Group of the Spanish Neurological Society. Early neurologic deterioration in intracerebral hemorrhage: predictors and associated factors. Neurology. 2004;63:
461– 467.
11. Tetri S, Juvela S, Saloheimo P, Pyhtinen J, Hillbom M. Hypertension
and diabetes as predictors of early death after spontaneous intracerebral
hemorrhage. J Neurosurg. 2009;110:411– 417.
12. Hemphill JC 3rd, Bonovich DC, Besmertis L, Manley GT, Johnston SC.
The ICH score: a simple, reliable grading scale for intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 2001;32:891– 897.
13. NINDS ICH Workshop Participants. Priorities for clinical research in
intracerebral hemorrhage: report from a National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke workshop. Stroke. 2005;36:e23– e41.
14. Broderick JP, Diringer MN, Hill MD, Brun NC, Mayer SA, Steiner T,
Skolnick BE, Davis SM; Recombinant Activated Factor VII Intracerebral Hemorrhage Trial Investigators. Determinants of intracerebral hemorrhage growth: an exploratory analysis. Stroke. 2007;38:1072–1075.
15. Cucchiara B, Messe S, Sansing L, Kasner S, Lyden P; CHANT Investigators. Hematoma growth in oral anticoagulant related intracerebral
hemorrhage. Stroke. 2008;39:2993–2996.
16. Flaherty ML, Tao H, Haverbusch M, Sekar P, Kleindorfer D, Kissela B,
Khatri P, Stettler B, Adeoye O, Moomaw CJ, Broderick JP, Woo D.
Warfarin use leads to larger intracerebral hematomas. Neurology. 2008;
71:1084 –1089.
17. Zubkov AY, Mandrekar JN, Claassen DO, Manno EM, Wijdicks EF,
Rabinstein AA. Predictors of outcome in warfarin-related intracerebral
hemorrhage. Arch Neurol. 2008;65:1320 –1325.
18. Cooper D, Jauch E, Flaherty ML. Critical pathways for the management
of stroke and intracerebral hemorrhage: a survey of US hospitals. Crit
Pathw Cardiol. 2007;6:18 –23.
19. Goldstein LB, Simel DL. Is this patient having a stroke? JAMA. 2005;
293:2391–2402.
20. Fiebach JB, Schellinger PD, Gass A, Kucinski T, Siebler M, Villringer
A, Olkers P, Hirsch JG, Heiland S, Wilde P, Jansen O, Ro¨ther J, Hacke
2124 Stroke September 2010
W, Sartor K; Kompetenznetzwerk Schlaganfall B5. Stroke magnetic
resonance imaging is accurate in hyperacute intracerebral hemorrhage: a
multicenter study on the validity of stroke imaging. Stroke. 2004;35:
502–506.
21. Chalela JA, Kidwell CS, Nentwich LM, Luby M, Butman JA, Demchuk
AM, Hill MD, Patronas N, Latour L, Warach S. Magnetic resonance
imaging and computed tomography in emergency assessment of patients
with suspected acute stroke: a prospective comparison. Lancet. 2007;
369:293–298.
22. Singer OC, Sitzer M, du Mesnil de Rochemont R, Neumann-Haefelin T.
Practical limitations of acute stroke MRI due to patient-related
problems. Neurology. 2004;62:1848 –1849.
23. Kazui S, Minematsu K, Yamamoto H, Sawada T, Yamaguchi T. Predisposing factors to enlargement of spontaneous intracerebral
hematoma. Stroke. 1997;28:2370 –2375.
24. Fujii Y, Takeuchi S, Sasaki O, Minakawa T, Tanaka R. Multivariate
analysis of predictors of hematoma enlargement in spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 1998;29:1160 –1166.
25. Davis SM, Broderick J, Hennerici M, Brun NC, Diringer MN, Mayer
SA, Begtrup K, Steiner T; Recombinant Activated Factor VII Intracerebral Hemorrhage Trial Investigators. Hematoma growth is a determinant of mortality and poor outcome after intracerebral hemorrhage.
Neurology. 2006;66:1175–1181.
26. Becker KJ, Baxter AB, Bybee HM, Tirschwell DL, Abouelsaad T,
Cohen WA. Extravasation of radiographic contrast is an independent
predictor of death in primary intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 1999;
30:2025–2032.
27. Goldstein JN, Fazen LE, Snider R, Schwab K, Greenberg SM, Smith
EE, Lev MH, Rosand J. Contrast extravasation on CT angiography
predicts hematoma expansion in intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurology.
2007;68:889 – 894.
28. Wada R, Aviv RI, Fox AJ, Sahlas DJ, Gladstone DJ, Tomlinson G,
Symons SP. CT angiography “spot sign” predicts hematoma expansion
in acute intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 2007;38:1257–1262.
29. Kim J, Smith A, Hemphill JC 3rd, Smith WS, Lu Y, Dillon WP,
Wintermark M. Contrast extravasation on CT predicts mortality in
primary intracerebral hemorrhage. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2008;29:
520 –525.
30. Ederies A, Demchuk A, Chia T, Gladstone DJ, Dowlatshahi D, Bendavit
G, Wong K, Symons SP, Aviv RI. Postcontrast CT extravasation is
associated with hematoma expansion in CTA spot negative patients.
Stroke. 2009;40:1672–1676.
31. Gazzola S, Aviv RI, Gladstone DJ, Mallia G, Li V, Fox AJ, Symons SP.
Vascular and nonvascular mimics of the CT angiography “spot sign” in
patients with secondary intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 2008;39:
1177–1183.
32. Nu¨ssel F, Wegmu¨ller H, Huber P. Comparison of magnetic resonance
angiography, magnetic resonance imaging and conventional
angiography in cerebral arteriovenous malformation. Neuroradiology.
1991;33:56 – 61.
33. Yoon HK, Shin HJ, Lee M, Byun HS, Na DG, Han BK. MR angiography
of moyamoya disease before and after encephaloduroarteriosynangiosis.
AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2000;174:195–200.
34. Rådberg JA, Olsson JE, Rådberg CT. Prognostic parameters in spontaneous intracerebral hematomas with special reference to anticoagulant
treatment. Stroke. 1991;22:571–576.
35. Nilsson OG, Lindgren A, Ståhl N, Brandt L, Sa¨veland H. Incidence of
intracerebral and subarachnoid haemorrhage in southern Sweden.
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2000;69:601– 607.
36. Flaherty ML, Kissela B, Woo D, Kleindorfer D, Alwell K, Sekar P,
Moomaw CJ, Haverbusch M, Broderick JP. The increasing incidence of
anticoagulant-associated intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurology. 2007;68:
116 –121.
37. Ansell J, Hirsh J, Hylek E, Jacobson A, Crowther M, Palareti G;
American College of Chest Physicians. Pharmacology and management
of the vitamin K antagonists: American College of Chest Physicians
Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines (8th Edition). Chest. 2008;
133(suppl):160S–198S.
38. Hanley JP. Warfarin reversal. J Clin Pathol. 2004;57:1132–1139.
39. Hung A, Singh S, Tait RC. A prospective randomized study to determine
the optimal dose of intravenous vitamin K in reversal of overwarfarinization. Br J Haematol. 2000;109:537–539.
40. Lubetsky A, Yonath H, Olchovsky D, Loebstein R, Halkin H, Ezra D.
Comparison of oral vs intravenous phytonadione (vitamin K1) in
Morgenstern y cols. Guías para el manejo de la hemorragia intracerebral espontánea 43
patients with excessive anticoagulation: a prospective randomized controlled study. Arch Intern Med. 2003;163:2469 –2473.
41. Watson HG, Baglin T, Laidlaw SL, Makris M, Preston FE. A comparison of the efficacy and rate of response to oral and intravenous
Vitamin K in reversal of over-anticoagulation with warfarin. Br J
Haematol. 2001;115:145–149.
42. Goldstein JN, Thomas SH, Frontiero V, Joseph A, Engel C, Snider R,
Smith EE, Greenberg SM, Rosand J. Timing of fresh frozen plasma
administration and rapid correction of coagulopathy in warfarin-related
intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 2006;37:151–155.
43. Leissinger CA, Blatt PM, Hoots WK, Ewenstein B. Role of prothrombin
complex concentrates in reversing warfarin anticoagulation: a review of
the literature. Am J Hematol. 2008;83:137–143.
44. Pabinger I, Brenner B, Kalina U, Knaub S, Nagy A, Ostermann H;
Beriplex P/N Anticoagulation Reversal Study Group. Prothrombin
complex concentrate (Beriplex P/N) for emergency anticoagulation
reversal: a prospective multinational clinical trial. J Thromb Haemost.
2008;6:622– 631.
45. Riess HB, Meier-Hellmann A, Motsch J, Elias M, Kursten FW, Dempfle
CE. Prothrombin complex concentrate (Octaplex) in patients requiring
immediate reversal of oral anticoagulation. Thromb Res. 2007;
121:9 –16.
46. Fredriksson K, Norrving B, Stro¨mblad LG. Emergency reversal of
anticoagulation after intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 1992;23:
972–977.
47. Cartmill M, Dolan G, Byrne JL, Byrne PO. Prothrombin complex
concentrate for oral anticoagulant reversal in neurosurgical emergencies.
Br J Neurosurg. 2000;14:458 – 461.
48. Sjo¨blom L, Hårdemark HG, Lindgren A, Norrving B, Fahle´n M, Samuelsson M, Stigendal L, Stockelberg D, Taghavi A, Wallrup L, Wallvik
J. Management and prognostic features of intracerebral hemorrhage
during anticoagulant therapy: a Swedish multicenter study. Stroke. 2001;
32:2567–2574.
49. Boulis NM, Bobek MP, Schmaier A, Hoff JT. Use of factor IX complex
in warfarin-related intracranial hemorrhage. Neurosurgery. 1999;45:
1113–1118.
50. Baglin TP, Keeling DM, Watson HG; British Committee for Standards
in Haematology. Guidelines on oral anticoagulation (warfarin): third
edition: 2005 update. Br J Haematol. 2006;132:277–285.
51. Baker RI, Coughlin PB, Gallus AS, Harper PL, Salem HH, Wood EM;
Warfarin Reversal Consensus Group. Warfarin reversal: consensus
guidelines, on behalf of the Australasian Society of Thromb Haemost.
Med J Aust. 2004;181:492– 497.
52. Steiner T, Kaste M, Forsting M, Mendelow D, Kwiecinski H, Szikora I,
Juvela S, Marchel A, Chapot R, Cognard C, Unterberg A, Hacke W.
Recommendations for the management of intracranial haemorrhage: part
I: spontaneous intracerebral haemorrhage: the European Stroke Initiative
Writing Committee and the Writing Committee for the EUSI Executive
Committee. Cerebrovasc Dis. 2006;22:294 –316.
53. Lin J, Hanigan WC, Tarantino M, Wang J. The use of recombinant
activated factor VII to reverse warfarin-induced anticoagulation in
patients with hemorrhages in the central nervous system: preliminary
findings. J Neurosurg. 2003;98:737–740.
54. Veshchev I, Elran H, Salame K. Recombinant coagulation factor VIIa
for rapid preoperative correction of warfarin-related coagulopathy in
patients with acute subdural hematoma. Med Sci Monit. 2002;8:
CS98 –CS100.
55. Sørensen B, Johansen P, Nielsen GL, Sørensen JC, Ingerslev J. Reversal
of the International Normalized Ratio with recombinant activated factor
VII in central nervous system bleeding during warfarin thromboprophylaxis: clinical and biochemical aspects. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis.
2003;14:469 – 477.
56. Freeman WD, Brott TG, Barrett KM, Castillo PR, Deen HG Jr,
Czervionke LF, Meschia JF. Recombinant factor VIIa for rapid reversal
of warfarin anticoagulation in acute intracranial hemorrhage. Mayo Clin
Proc. 2004;79:1495–1500.
57. Ilyas C, Beyer GM, Dutton RP, Scalea TM, Hess JR. Recombinant
factor VIIa for warfarin-associated intracranial bleeding. J Clin Anesth.
2008;20:276 –279.
58. Tanaka KA, Szlam F, Dickneite G, Levy JH. Effects of prothrombin
complex concentrate and recombinant activated factor VII on vitamin K
antagonist induced anticoagulation. Thromb Res. 2008;122:117–123.
59. Rosovsky RP, Crowther MA. What Is the Evidence for the Off-label Use
of Recombinant Factor VIIa (rFVIIa) in the Acute Reversal of Warfarin?
Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2008:36 –38.
60. Mayer SA, Brun NC, Begtrup K, Broderick J, Davis S, Diringer MN,
Skolnick BE, Steiner T; Recombinant Activated Factor VII Intracerebral
Hemorrhage Trial Investigators. Recombinant activated factor VII for
acute intracerebral hemorrhage. N Engl J Med. 2005;352:777–785.
61. Mayer SA, Brun NC, Begtrup K, Broderick J, Davis S, Diringer MN,
Skolnick BE, Steiner T; FAST Trial Investigators. Efficacy and safety of
recombinant activated factor VII for acute intracerebral hemorrhage.
N Engl J Med. 2008;358:2127–2137.
62. Sansing LH, Messe SR, Cucchiara BL, Cohen SN, Lyden PD, Kasner
SE; CHANT Investigators. Prior antiplatelet use does not affect hemorrhage growth or outcome after ICH. Neurology. 2009;72:1397–1402.
63. Naidech AM, Jovanovic B, Liebling S, Garg RK, Bassin SL, Bendok
BR, Bernstein RA, Alberts MJ, Batjer HH. Reduced platelet activity is
associated with early clot growth and worse 3-month outcome after
intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 2009;40:2398 –2401.
64. Naidech AM, Bernstein RA, Levasseur K, Bassin SL, Bendok BR,
Batjer HH, Bleck TP, Alberts MJ. Platelet activity and outcome after
intracerebral hemorrhage. Ann Neurol. 2009;65:352–356.
65. Gregory PC, Kuhlemeier KV. Prevalence of venous thromboembolism
in acute hemorrhagic and thromboembolic stroke. Am J Phys Med
Rehabil. 2003;82:364 –369.
66. Kawase K, Okazaki S, Toyoda K, Toratani N, Yoshimura S, Kawano H,
Nagatsuka K, Matsuo H, Naritomi H, Minematsu K. Sex difference in
the prevalence of deep-vein thrombosis in Japanese patients with acute
intracerebral hemorrhage. Cerebrovasc Dis. 2009;27:313–319.
67. Christensen MC, Dawson J, Vincent C. Risk of thromboembolic complications after intracerebral hemorrhage according to ethnicity. Adv
Ther. 2008;25:831– 841.
68. Lacut K, Bressollette L, Le Gal G, Etienne E, De Tinteniac A, Renault
A, Rouhart F, Besson G, Garcia JF, Mottier D, Oger E; VICTORIAh
(Venous Intermittent Compression and Thrombosis Occurrence Related
to Intra-cerebral Acute hemorrhage) Investigators. Prevention of venous
thrombosis in patients with acute intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurology.
2005;65:865– 869.
69. CLOTS Trials Collaboration, Dennis M, Sandercock PA, Reid J,
Graham C, Murray G, Venables G, Rudd A, Bowler G. Effectiveness of
thigh-length graduated compression stockings to reduce the risk of deep
vein thrombosis after stroke (CLOTS trial 1): a multicentre, randomised
controlled trial. Lancet. 2009;373:1958 –1965.
70. Boeer A, Voth E, Henze T, Prange HW. Early heparin therapy
in patients with spontaneous intracerebral haemorrhage. J Neurol
Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1991;54:466 – 467.
71. Dickmann U, Voth E, Schicha H, Henze T, Prange H, Emrich D.
Heparin therapy, deep-vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism after
intracerebral hemorrhage. Klin Wochenschr. 1988;66:1182–1183.
72. Qureshi AI, Ezzeddine MA, Nasar A, Suri MF, Kirmani JF, Hussein
HM, Divani AA, Reddi AS. Prevalence of elevated blood pressure in
563,704 adult patients with stroke presenting to the ED in the United
States. Am J Emerg Med. 2007;25:32–38.
73. Zhang Y, Reilly KH, Tong W, Xu T, Chen J, Bazzano LA, Qiao D, Ju
Z, Chen CS, He J. Blood pressure and clinical outcome among patients
with acute stroke in Inner Mongolia, China. J Hypertens. 2008;26:
1446 –1452.
74. Jauch EC, Lindsell CJ, Adeoye O, Khoury J, Barsan W, Broderick J,
Pancioli A, Brott T. Lack of evidence for an association between
hemodynamic variables and hematoma growth in spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 2006;37:2061–2065.
75. Willmot M, Leonardi-Bee J, Bath PM. High blood pressure in acute
stroke and subsequent outcome: a systematic review. Hypertension.
2004;43:18 –24.
76. Leonardi-Bee J, Bath PM, Phillips SJ, Sandercock PA; IST Collaborative Group. Blood pressure and clinical outcomes in the International
Stroke Trial. Stroke. 2002;33:1315–1320.
77. Vemmos KN, Tsivgoulis G, Spengos K, Zakopoulos N, Synetos A,
Manios E, Konstantopoulou P, Mavrikakis M. U-shaped relationship
between mortality and admission blood pressure in patients with acute
stroke. J Intern Med. 2004;255:257–265.
78. Zazulia AR, Diringer MN, Videen TO, Adams RE, Yundt K, Aiyagari
V, Grubb RL Jr, Powers WJ. Hypoperfusion without ischemia surrounding acute intracerebral hemorrhage. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab.
2001;21:804 – 810.
79. Anderson CS, Huang Y, Wang JG, Arima H, Neal B, Peng B, Heeley E,
Skulina C, Parsons MW, Kim JS, Tao QL, Li YC, Jiang JD, Tai LW,
Zhang JL, Xu E, Cheng Y, Heritier S, Morgenstern LB, Chalmers J;
INTERACT Investigators. Intensive blood pressure reduction in acute
44 Stroke Abril 2011
cerebral haemorrhage trial (INTERACT): a randomised pilot trial.
Lancet Neurol. 2008;7:391–399.
80. Broderick JP, Adams HP Jr, Barsan W, Feinberg W, Feldmann E, Grotta
J, Kase C, Krieger D, Mayberg M, Tilley B, Zabramski JM, Zuccarello
M. Guidelines for the management of spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage: a statement for healthcare professionals from a special writing
group of the Stroke Council, American Heart Association. Stroke. 1999;
30:905–915.
81. Qureshi AI. Antihypertensive Treatment of Acute Cerebral Hemorrhage
(ATACH): rationale and design. Neurocritical Care. 2007;6:56 – 66.
82. Qureshi A. Antihypertensive treatment of acute cerebral hemorrhage
(ATACH) trial. Presented at the International Stroke Conference, New
Orleans, La, February 20 –22, 2008.
83. Diringer MN, Edwards DF. Admission to a neurologic/neurosurgical
intensive care unit is associated with reduced mortality rate after intracerebral hemorrhage. Crit Care Med. 2001;29:635– 640.
84. Estabrooks CA, Midodzi WK, Cummings GG, Ricker KL, Giovannetti
P. The impact of hospital nursing characteristics on 30-day mortality.
Nurs Res. 2005;54:74 – 84.
85. Fogelholm R, Murros K, Rissanen A, Avikainen S. Admission blood
glucose and short term survival in primary intracerebral haemorrhage: a
population based study. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2005;76:
349 –353.
86. Kimura K, Iguchi Y, Inoue T, Shibazaki K, Matsumoto N, Kobayashi K,
Yamashita S. Hyperglycemia independently increases the risk of early
death in acute spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage. J Neurol Sci.
2007;255:90 –94.
87. Passero S, Ciacci G, Ulivelli M. The influence of diabetes and hyperglycemia on clinical course after intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurology.
2003;61:1351–1356.
88. van den Berghe G, Wouters P, Weekers F, Verwaest C, Bruyninckx F,
Schetz M, Vlasselaers D, Ferdinande P, Lauwers P, Bouillon R.
Intensive insulin therapy in the critically ill patients. N Engl J Med.
2001;345:1359 –1367.
89. Oddo M, Schmidt JM, Carrera E, Badjatia N, Connolly ES, Presciutti M,
Ostapkovich ND, Levine JM, Le Roux P, Mayer SA. Impact of tight
glycemic control on cerebral glucose metabolism after severe brain
injury: a microdialysis study. Crit Care Med. 2008;36:3233–3238.
90. Vespa P, Boonyaputthikul R, McArthur DL, Miller C, Etchepare M,
Bergsneider M, Glenn T, Martin N, Hovda D. Intensive insulin therapy
reduces microdialysis glucose values without altering glucose utilization
or improving the lactate/pyruvate ratio after traumatic brain injury. Crit
Care Med. 2006;34:850 – 856.
91. Vespa PM. Intensive glycemic control in traumatic brain injury: what is
the ideal glucose range? Crit Care. 2008;12:175.
92. NICE-SUGAR Study Investigators, Finfer S, Chittock DR, Su SY, Blair
D, Foster D, Dhingra V, Bellomo R, Cook D, Dodek P, Henderson WR,
He´bert PC, Heritier S, Heyland DK, McArthur C, McDonald E, Mitchell
I, Myburgh JA, Norton R, Potter J, Robinson BG, Ronco JJ. Intensive
versus conventional glucose control in critically ill patients. N Engl
J Med. 2009;360:1283–1297.
93. Michenfelder JD, Milde JH. The relationship among canine brain temperature, metabolism, and function during hypothermia. Anesthesiology.
1991;75:130 –136.
94. Takagi K. Body temperature in acute stroke. Stroke. 2002;33:
2154 –2155.
95. Schwarz S, Ha¨fner K, Aschoff A, Schwab S. Incidence and prognostic
significance of fever following intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurology.
2000;54:354 –361.
96. Berger AR, Lipton RB, Lesser ML, Lantos G, Portenoy RK. Early
seizures following intracerebral hemorrhage: implications for therapy.
Neurology. 1988;38:1363–1365.
97. Bladin CF, Alexandrov AV, Bellavance A, Bornstein N, Chambers B,
Cote´ R, Lebrun L, Pirisi A, Norris JW. Seizures after stroke: a prospective multicenter study. Arch Neurol. 2000;57:1617–1622.
98. Passero S, Rocchi R, Rossi S, Ulivelli M, Vatti G. Seizures after
spontaneous supratentorial intracerebral hemorrhage. Epilepsia. 2002;
43:1175–1180.
99. Sung CY, Chu NS. Epileptic seizures in intracerebral haemorrhage.
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1989;52:1273–1276.
100. Yang TM, Lin WC, Chang WN, Ho JT, Wang HC, Tsai NW, Shih YT,
Lu CH. Predictors and outcome of seizures after spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage. Clinical article. J Neurosurg. 2009;111:87–93.
101. Vespa PM, O’Phelan K, Shah M, Mirabelli J, Starkman S, Kidwell C,
Saver J, Nuwer MR, Frazee JG, McArthur DA, Martin NA. Acute
seizures after intracerebral hemorrhage: a factor in progressive midline
shift and outcome. Neurology. 2003;60:1441–1446.
102. Claassen J, Jette´ N, Chum F, Green R, Schmidt M, Choi H, Jirsch J,
Frontera JA, Connolly ES, Emerson RG, Mayer SA, Hirsch LJ. Electrographic seizures and periodic discharges after intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurology. 2007;69:1356 –1365.
103. Andaluz N, Zuccarello M. Recent trends in the treatment of spontaneous
intracerebral hemorrhage: analysis of a nationwide inpatient database.
J Neurosurg. 2009;110:403– 410.
104. Szaflarski JP, Rackley AY, Kleindorfer DO, Khoury J, Woo D, Miller
R, Alwell K, Broderick JP, Kissela BM. Incidence of seizures in the
acute phase of stroke: a population-based study. Epilepsia. 2008;49:
974 –981.
105. Messe´ SR, Sansing LH, Cucchiara BL, Herman ST, Lyden PD, Kasner
SE; CHANT investigators. Prophylactic antiepileptic drug use is associated with poor outcome following ICH. Neurocrit Care. 2009;11:
38 – 44.
106. Naidech AM, Garg RK, Liebling S, Levasseur K, Macken MP, Schuele
SU, Batjer HH. Anticonvulsant use and outcomes after intracerebral
hemorrhage. Stroke. 2009;40:3810 –3815.
107. Gu Y, Hua Y, Keep RF, Morgenstern LB, Xi G. Deferoxamine reduces
intracerebral hematoma-induced iron accumulation and neuronal death
in piglets. Stroke. 2009;40:2241–2243.
108. Huang FP, Xi G, Keep RF, Hua Y, Nemoianu A, Hoff JT. Brain edema
after experimental intracerebral hemorrhage: role of hemoglobin degradation products. J Neurosurg. 2002;96:287–293.
109. Nakamura T, Keep RF, Hua Y, Schallert T, Hoff JT, Xi G. Deferoxamine-induced attenuation of brain edema and neurological deficits in a
rat model of intracerebral hemorrhage. J Neurosurg. 2004;100:672– 678.
110. Okauchi M, Hua Y, Keep RF, Morgenstern LB, Xi G. Effects of
deferoxamine on intracerebral hemorrhage-induced brain injury in aged
rats. Stroke. 2009;40:1858 –1863.
111. Wu J, Hua Y, Keep RF, Nakamura T, Hoff JT, Xi G. Iron and ironhandling proteins in the brain after intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke.
2003;34:2964 –2969.
112. de la Ossa N, Sobrino T, Silva Y, Trueta J, Girona, Spain Milla M,
Gomis M, Agulla J, Serena J, Castillo J, Da’ valos A. High serum ferritin
levels are associated with poor outcome of patients with spontaneous
intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 2009;40:e105. Abstract P343.
113. Lou M, Lieb K, Selim M. The relationship between hematoma iron
content and perihematoma edema: an MRI study. Cerebrovasc Dis.
2009;27:266 –271.
114. Mehdiratta M, Kumar S, Hackney D, Schlaug G, Selim M. Association
between serum ferritin level and perihematoma edema volume in
patients with spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 2008;39:
1165–1170.
115. Selim M. Deferoxamine mesylate: a new hope for intracerebral hemorrhage: from bench to clinical trials. Stroke. 2009;40(suppl):S90 –S91.
116. Ratan RR, Siddiq A, Aminova L, Langley B, McConoughey S,
Karpisheva K, Lee HH, Carmichael T, Kornblum H, Coppola G,
Geschwind DH, Hoke A, Smirnova N, Rink C, Roy S, Sen C, Beattie
MS, Hart RP, Grumet M, Sun D, Freeman RS, Semenza GL, Gazaryan
I. Small molecule activation of adaptive gene expression: tilorone or its
analogs are novel potent activators of hypoxia inducible factor-1 that
provide prophylaxis against stroke and spinal cord injury. Ann N Y Acad
Sci. 2008;1147:383–394.
117. Regan RF, Panter SS. Hemoglobin potentiates excitotoxic injury in
cortical cell culture. J Neurotrauma. 1996;13:223–231.
118. Siddiq A, Ayoub IA, Chavez JC, Aminova L, Shah S, LaManna JC,
Patton SM, Connor JR, Cherny RA, Volitakis I, Bush AI, Langsetmo I,
Seeley T, Gunzler V, Ratan RR. Hypoxia-inducible factor prolyl
4-hydroxylase inhibition: a target for neuroprotection in the central
nervous system. J Biol Chem. 2005;280:41732– 41743.
119. Zaman K, Ryu H, Hall D, O’Donovan K, Lin KI, Miller MP, Marquis
JC, Baraban JM, Semenza GL, Ratan RR. Protection from oxidative
stress-induced apoptosis in cortical neuronal cultures by iron chelators is
associated with enhanced DNA binding of hypoxia-inducible factor-1
and ATF-1/CREB and increased expression of glycolytic enzymes,
p21(waf1/cip1), and erythropoietin. J Neurosci. 1999;19:9821–9830.
120. Fernandes HM, Siddique S, Banister K, Chambers I, Wooldridge T,
Gregson B, Mendelow AD. Continuous monitoring of ICP and CPP
following ICH and its relationship to clinical, radiological and surgical
parameters. Acta Neurochir Suppl. 2000;76:463– 466.
121. Ziai WC, Torbey MT, Naff NJ, Williams MA, Bullock R, Marmarou A,
Tuhrim S, Schmutzhard E, Pfausler B, Hanley DF. Frequency of sus-
Morgenstern y cols. Guías para el manejo de la hemorragia intracerebral espontánea 45
tained intracranial pressure elevation during treatment of severe intraventricular hemorrhage. Cerebrovasc Dis. 2009;27:403– 410.
122. Chambers IR, Banister K, Mendelow AD. Intracranial pressure within a
developing intracerebral haemorrhage. Br J Neurosurg. 2001;15:
140 –141.
123. Martı´nez-Man˜as RM, Santamarta D, de Campos JM, Ferrer E. Camino
intracranial pressure monitor: prospective study of accuracy and complications. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2000;69:82– 86.
124. Guyot LL, Dowling C, Diaz FG, Michael DB. Cerebral monitoring
devices: analysis of complications. Acta Neurochir Suppl. 1998;71:
47– 49.
125. Brain Trauma Foundation; American Association of Neurological Surgeons; Congress of Neurological Surgeons; Joint Section on Neurotrauma and Critical Care, AANS/CNS, Bratton SL, Chestnut RM,
Ghajar J, McConnell Hammond FF, Harris OA, Hartl R, Manley GT,
Nemecek A, Newell DW, Rosenthal G, Schouten J, Shutter L, Timmons
SD, Ullman JS, Videtta W, Wilberger JE, Wright DW. Guidelines for
the management of severe traumatic brain injury. IX. Cerebral perfusion
thresholds. J Neurotrauma. 2007;24(suppl 1):S59 –S64.
126. Management and Prognosis of Severe Traumatic Brain Injury. New
York, NY: Brain Trauma Foundation; 2000.
127. Diringer MN, Edwards DF, Zazulia AR. Hydrocephalus: a previously
unrecognized predictor of poor outcome from supratentorial intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke. 1998;29:1352–1357.
128. Huttner HB, Nagel S, Tognoni E, Köhrmann M, J¨uttler E, Orakcioglu B,
Schellinger PD, Schwab S, Bardutzky J. Intracerebral hemorrhage with
severe ventricular involvement: lumbar drainage for communicating
hydrocephalus. Stroke. 2007;38:183–187.
129. van Gijn J, Hijdra A, Wijdicks EF, Vermeulen M, van Crevel H. Acute
hydrocephalus after aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage. J Neurosurg.
1985;63:355–362.
130. Diringer M, Ladenson PW, Stern BJ, Schleimer J, Hanley DF. Plasma
atrial natriuretic factor and subarachnoid hemorrhage. Stroke. 1988;19:
1119 –1124.
131. Bhattathiri PS, Gregson B, Prasad KS, Mendelow AD; STICH Investigators. Intraventricular hemorrhage and hydrocephalus after spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage: results from the STICH trial. Acta
Neurochir Suppl. 2006;96:65– 68.
132. Hemphill JC 3rd, Morabito D, Farrant M, Manley GT. Brain tissue
oxygen monitoring in intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurocrit Care. 2005;
3:260 –270.
133. Miller CM, Vespa PM, McArthur DL, Hirt D, Etchepare M. Frameless
stereotactic aspiration and thrombolysis of deep intracerebral hemorrhage is associated with reduced levels of extracellular cerebral glutamate and unchanged lactate pyruvate ratios. Neurocrit Care. 2007;6:
22–29.
134. Hallevi H, Albright KC, Aronowski J, Barreto AD, Martin-Schild S, Khaja
AM, Gonzales NR, Illoh K, Noser EA, Grotta JC. Intraventricular hemorrhage: Anatomic relationships and clinical implications. Neurology. 2008;
70:848 – 852.
135. Engelhard HH, Andrews CO, Slavin KV, Charbel FT. Current management of intraventricular hemorrhage. Surg Neurol. 2003;60:15–21.
136. Huttner HB, K[umlaut]ohrmann M, Berger C, Georgiadis D, Schwab S.
Influence of intraventricular hemorrhage and occlusive hydrocephalus
on the long-term outcome of treated patients with basal ganglia hemorrhage: a case-control study. J Neurosurg. 2006;105:412– 417.
137. Fountas KN, Kapsalaki EZ, Parish DC, Smith B, Smisson HF, Johnston
KW, Robinson JS. Intraventricular administration of rt-PA in patients
with intraventricular hemorrhage. South Med J. 2005;98:767–773.
138. Lapointe M, Haines S. Fibrinolytic therapy for intraventricular hemorrhage in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2002:CD003692.
139. Murry KR, Rhoney DH, Coplin WM. Urokinase in the treatment of
intraventricular hemorrhage. Ann Pharmacother. 1998;32:256 –258.
140. Naff NJ, Hanley DF, Keyl PM, Tuhrim S, Kraut M, Bederson J, Bullock
R, Mayer SA, Schmutzhard E. Intraventricular thrombolysis speeds
blood clot resolution: results of a pilot, prospective, randomized, doubleblind, controlled trial. Neurosurgery. 2004;54:577–583.
141. Nieuwkamp DJ, de Gans K, Rinkel GJ, Algra A. Treatment and outcome
of severe intraventricular extension in patients with subarachnoid or
intracerebral hemorrhage: a systematic review of the literature. J Neurol.
2000;247:117–121.
142. Pang D, Sclabassi RJ, Horton JA. Lysis of intraventricular blood clot with
urokinase in a canine model: part 3: effects of intraventricular urokinase on
clot lysis and posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus. Neurosurgery. 1986;19:
553–572.
143. Morgan T, Awad I, Keyl P, Lane K, Hanley D. Preliminary report of the
clot lysis evaluating accelerated resolution of intraventricular hemorrhage (CLEAR-IVH) clinical trial. Acta neurochirurgica. 2008;105:
217–220.
144. Horva´th Z, Veto F, Bala´s I, K[umlaut]ove´r F, Do´czi T. Biportal endoscopic removal of a primary intraventricular hematoma: case report.
Minim Invasive Neurosurg. 2000;43:4 – 8.
145. Longatti PL, Martinuzzi A, Fiorindi A, Maistrello L, Carteri A. Neuroendoscopic management of intraventricular hemorrhage. Stroke. 2004;
35:e35– e38.
146. Yadav YR, Mukerji G, Shenoy R, Basoor A, Jain G, Nelson A. Endoscopic management of hypertensive intraventricular haemorrhage with
obstructive hydrocephalus. BMC Neurol. 2007;7:1.
147. Yilmazlar S, Abas F, Korfali E. Comparison of ventricular drainage in
poor grade patients after intracranial hemorrhage. Neurol Res. 2005;27:
653– 656.
148. Huttner HB, Schwab S, Bardutzky J. Lumbar drainage for communicating hydrocephalus after ICH with ventricular hemorrhage. Neurocrit
Care. 2006;5:193–196.
149. Wang WZ, Jiang B, Liu HM, Li D, Lu CZ, Zhao YD, Sander JW.
Minimally invasive craniopuncture therapy vs. conservative treatment
for spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage: results from a randomized
clinical trial in China. Int J Stroke. 2009;4:11–16.
150. Kase C. Cerebellar hemorrhage. In: Kase C, Caplan L, eds. Intracerebral
Hemorrhage. Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann; 1994:425– 443.
151. Sypert G, Arpin-Sypert E. Spontaneous posterior fossa hematomas. In:
Kaufman H, ed. Intracerebral Hematomas. New York, NY: Raven
Press;1992:187–196.
152. Da Pian R, Bazzan A, Pasqualin A. Surgical versus medical treatment of
spontaneous posterior fossa haematomas: a cooperative study on 205
cases. Neurol Res. 1984;6:145–151.
153. Kirollos RW, Tyagi AK, Ross SA, van Hille PT, Marks PV. Management of spontaneous cerebellar hematomas: a prospective treatment
protocol. Neurosurgery. 2001;49:1378 –1386.
154. Morioka J, Fujii M, Kato S, Fujisawa H, Akimura T, Suzuki M,
Kobayashi S; Japan Standard Stroke Registry Group (JSSR). Surgery for
spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage has greater remedial value than
conservative therapy. Surg Neurol. 2006;65:67–72.
155. van Loon J, Van Calenbergh F, Goffin J, Plets C. Controversies in the
management of spontaneous cerebellar haemorrhage: a consecutive
series of 49 cases and review of the literature. Acta Neurochir (Wien).
1993;122:187–193.
156. Mendelow AD, Gregson BA, Fernandes HM, Murray GD, Teasdale
GM, Hope DT, Karimi A, Shaw MD, Barer DH; STICH investigators.
Early surgery versus initial conservative treatment in patients with
spontaneous supratentorial intracerebral haematomas in the International
Surgical Trial in Intracerebral Haemorrhage (STICH): a randomised
trial. Lancet. 2005;365:387–397.
157. Kirkman MA, Mahattanakul W, Gregson BA, Mendelow AD. The effect
of the results of the STICH trial on the management of spontaneous
supratentorial intracerebral haemorrhage in Newcastle. Br J Neurosurg.
2008;22:739 –746.
158. Pantazis G, Tsitsopoulos P, Mihas C, Katsiva V, Stavrianos V, Zymaris
S. Early surgical treatment vs conservative management for spontaneous
supratentorial intracerebral hematomas: a prospective randomized study.
Surg Neurol. 2006;66:492–501.
159. Juvela S, Heiskanen O, Poranen A, Valtonen S, Kuurne T, Kaste M,
Troupp H. The treatment of spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage: a
prospective randomized trial of surgical and conservative treatment.
J Neurosurg. 1989;70:755–758.
160. Teernstra OP, Evers SM, Lodder J, Leffers P, Franke CL, Blaauw G;
Multicenter randomized controlled trial (SICHPA). Stereotactic
treatment of intracerebral hematoma by means of a plasminogen activator: a multicenter randomized controlled trial (SICHPA). Stroke.
2003;34:968 –974.
161. Zuccarello M, Brott T, Derex L, Kothari R, Sauerbeck L, Tew J, Van
Loveren H, Yeh HS, Tomsick T, Pancioli A, Khoury J, Broderick J.
Early surgical treatment for supratentorial intracerebral hemorrhage: a
randomized feasibility study. Stroke. 1999;30:1833–1839.
162. Kanaya H, Saiki I, Ohuchi T. Hypertensive ICH in Japan: update on
surgical treatment. In: Mizukami M, Kanaya K, Yamori Y, eds.
Hypertensive Intracerebral Hemorrhage. New York, NY: Raven
Press; 1983:147–163.
163. Kanno T, Sano H, Shinomiya Y, Katada K, Nagata J, Hoshino M,
Mitsuyama F. Role of surgery in hypertensive intracerebral
46 Stroke Abril 2011
hematoma: a comparative study of 305 nonsurgical and 154 surgical
cases. J Neurosurg. 1984;61:1091–1099.
164. Morgan T, Zuccarello M, Narayan R, Keyl P, Lane K, Hanley D.
Preliminary findings of the minimally-invasive surgery plus rtPA for
intracerebral hemorrhage evacuation (MISTIE) clinical trial. Acta
Neurochir Suppl. 2008;105:147–151.
165. Auer LM, Deinsberger W, Niederkorn K, Gell G, Kleinert R, Schneider
G, Holzer P, Bone G, Mokry M, K[umlaut]orner E, et al. Endoscopic
surgery versus medical treatment for spontaneous intracerebral
hematoma: a randomized study. J Neurosurg. 1989;70:530 –535.
166. Cho DY, Chen CC, Chang CS, Lee WY, Tso M. Endoscopic surgery for
spontaneous basal ganglia hemorrhage: comparing endoscopic surgery,
stereotactic aspiration, and craniotomy in noncomatose patients. Surg
Neurol. 2006;65:547–555.
167. Nishihara T, Morita A, Teraoka A, Kirino T. Endoscopy-guided removal
of spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage: comparison with computer
tomography-guided stereotactic evacuation. Childs Nerv Syst. 2007;23:
677– 683.
168. Morgenstern LB, Frankowski RF, Shedden P, Pasteur W, Grotta JC.
Surgical treatment for intracerebral hemorrhage (STICH): a singlecenter, randomized clinical trial. Neurology. 1998;51:1359 –1363.
169. Kaneko M, Tanaka K, Shimada T, Sato K, Uemura K. Long-term
evaluation of ultra-early operation for hypertensive intracerebral hemorrhage in 100 cases. J Neurosurg. 1983;58:838 – 842.
170. Morgenstern LB, Demchuk AM, Kim DH, Frankowski RF, Grotta JC.
Rebleeding leads to poor outcome in ultra-early craniotomy for intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurology. 2001;56:1294 –1299.
171. Tan SH, Ng PY, Yeo TT, Wong SH, Ong PL, Venketasubramanian N.
Hypertensive basal ganglia hemorrhage: a prospective study comparing
surgical and nonsurgical management. Surg Neurol. 2001;56:287–292.
172. Broderick JP, Brott TG, Duldner JE, Tomsick T, Huster G. Volume of
intracerebral hemorrhage: a powerful and easy-to-use predictor of
30-day mortality. Stroke. 1993;24:987–993.
173. Ariesen MJ, Algra A, van der Worp HB, Rinkel GJ. Applicability and
relevance of models that predict short term outcome after intracerebral
haemorrhage. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2005;76:839 – 844.
174. Cheung RT, Zou LY. Use of the original, modified, or new intracerebral
hemorrhage score to predict mortality and morbidity after intracerebral
hemorrhage. Stroke. 2003;34:1717–1722.
175. Lisk DR, Pasteur W, Rhoades H, Putnam RD, Grotta JC. Early presentation of hemispheric intracerebral hemorrhage: prediction of outcome
and guidelines for treatment allocation. Neurology. 1994;44:133–139.
176. Rost NS, Smith EE, Chang Y, Snider RW, Chanderraj R, Schwab K,
FitzMaurice E, Wendell L, Goldstein JN, Greenberg SM, Rosand J.
Prediction of functional outcome in patients with primary intracerebral
hemorrhage: the FUNC score. Stroke. 2008;39:2304 –2309.
177. Ruiz-Sandoval JL, Chiquete E, Romero-Vargas S, Padilla-Martínez JJ,
Gonza´lez-Cornejo S. Grading scale for prediction of outcome in primary
intracerebral hemorrhages. Stroke. 2007;38:1641–1644.
178. Tuhrim S, Dambrosia JM, Price TR, Mohr JP, Wolf PA, Hier DB, Kase
CS. Intracerebral hemorrhage: external validation and extension of a
model for prediction of 30-day survival. Ann Neurol. 1991;29:658 – 663.
179. Tuhrim S, Horowitz DR, Sacher M, Godbold JH. Validation and comparison of models predicting survival following intracerebral hemorrhage. Crit Care Med. 1995;23:950 –954.
180. Tuhrim S, Horowitz DR, Sacher M, Godbold JH. Volume of ventricular
blood is an important determinant of outcome in supratentorial intracerebral hemorrhage. Crit Care Med. 1999;27:617– 621.
181. Naidech AM, Bernstein RA, Bassin SL, Garg RK, Liebling S, Bendok
BR, Batjer HH, Bleck TP. How patients die after intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurocrit Care. 2009;11:45– 49.
182. Zurasky JA, Aiyagari V, Zazulia AR, Shackelford A, Diringer MN. Early
mortality following spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurology.
2005;64:725–727.
183. Becker KJ, Baxter AB, Cohen WA, Bybee HM, Tirschwell DL, Newell
DW, Winn HR, Longstreth WT Jr. Withdrawal of support in intracerebral hemorrhage may lead to self-fulfilling prophecies. Neurology. 2001;
56:766 –772.
184. Zahuranec DB, Brown DL, Lisabeth LD, Gonzales NR, Longwell PJ,
Smith MA, Garcia NM, Morgenstern LB. Early care limitations independently predict mortality after intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurology.
2007;68:1651–1657.
185. Mirski MA, Chang CW, Cowan R. Impact of a neuroscience intensive
care unit on neurosurgical patient outcomes and cost of care:
evidence-based support for an intensivist-directed specialty ICU model
of care. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol. 2001;13:83–92.
186. Hemphill JC 3rd, White DB. Clinical nihilism in neuroemergencies.
Emerg Med Clin North Am. 2009;27:27–37, vii–viii.
187. Bailey RD, Hart RG, Benavente O, Pearce LA. Recurrent brain hemorrhage is more frequent than ischemic stroke after intracranial hemorrhage. Neurology. 2001;56:773–777.
188. Vermeer SE, Algra A, Franke CL, Koudstaal PJ, Rinkel GJ.
Long-term prognosis after recovery from primary intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurology. 2002;59:205–209.
189. Viswanathan A, Rakich SM, Engel C, Snider R, Rosand J, Greenberg
SM, Smith EE. Antiplatelet use after intracerebral hemorrhage.
Neurology. 2006;66:206 –209.
190. Vinters HV. Cerebral amyloid angiopathy: a critical review. Stroke.
1987;18:311–324.
191. O’Donnell HC, Rosand J, Knudsen KA, Furie KL, Segal AZ, Chiu RI,
Ikeda D, Greenberg SM. Apolipoprotein E genotype and the risk of
recurrent lobar intracerebral hemorrhage. N Engl J Med. 2000;342:
240 –245.
192. Fisher CM. Pathological observations in hypertensive cerebral hemorrhage. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 1971;30:536 –550.
193. Tzourio C, Arima H, Harrap S, Anderson C, Godin O, Woodward M,
Neal B, Bousser MG, Chalmers J, Cambien F, MacMahon S. APOE
genotype, ethnicity, and the risk of cerebral hemorrhage. Neurology.
2008;70:1322–1328.
194. Greenberg SM, Eng JA, Ning M, Smith EE, Rosand J. Hemorrhage
burden predicts recurrent intracerebral hemorrhage after lobar hemorrhage. Stroke. 2004;35:1415–1420.
195. Passero S, Burgalassi L, D’Andrea P, Battistini N. Recurrence of
bleeding in patients with primary intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke.
1995;26:1189 –1192.
196. Bae H, Jeong D, Doh J, Lee K, Yun I, Byun B. Recurrence of bleeding
in patients with hypertensive intracerebral hemorrhage. Cerebrovasc
Dis. 1999;9:102–108.
197. Chobanian AV, Bakris GL, Black HR, Cushman WC, Green LA, Izzo
JL Jr, Jones DW, Materson BJ, Oparil S, Wright JT Jr, Roccella EJ;
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Joint National Committee on
Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood
Pressure; National High Blood Pressure Education Program Coordinating Committee. The Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee
on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood
Pressure: the JNC 7 report. JAMA. 2003;289:2560 –2572.
198. Rosand J, Eckman MH, Knudsen KA, Singer DE, Greenberg SM. The
effect of warfarin and intensity of anticoagulation on outcome of intracerebral hemorrhage. Arch Intern Med. 2004;164:880 – 884.
199. Flaherty ML, Haverbusch M, Sekar P, Kissela BM, Kleindorfer D,
Moomaw CJ, Broderick JP, Woo D. Location and outcome of
anticoagulant-associated intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurocrit Care.
2006;5:197–201.
200. Eckman MH, Rosand J, Knudsen KA, Singer DE, Greenberg SM. Can
patients be anticoagulated after intracerebral hemorrhage? A decision
analysis. Stroke. 2003;34:1710 –1716.
201. Taylor FC, Cohen H, Ebrahim S. Systematic review of long term
anticoagulation or antiplatelet treatment in patients with non-rheumatic
atrial fibrillation. BMJ. 2001;322:321–326.
202. ACTIVE Investigators, Connolly SJ, Pogue J, Hart RG, Hohnloser SH,
Pfeffer M, Chrolavicius S, Yusuf S. Effect of clopidogrel added to aspirin
in patients with atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2009;360:2066 –2078.
203. Goldstein LB, Amarenco P, Szarek M, Callahan A 3rd, Hennerici M,
Sillesen H, Zivin JA, Welch KM; SPARCL Investigators. Hemorrhagic
stroke in the Stroke Prevention by Aggressive Reduction in Cholesterol
Levels study. Neurology. 2008;70:2364 –2370.
204. Woo D, Sauerbeck LR, Kissela BM, Khoury JC, Szaflarski JP, Gebel J,
Shukla R, Pancioli AM, Jauch EC, Menon AG, Deka R, Carrozzella JA,
Moomaw CJ, Fontaine RN, Broderick JP. Genetic and environmental
risk factors for intracerebral hemorrhage: preliminary results of a
population-based study. Stroke. 2002;33:1190 –1195.
205. Tsementzis SA, Gill JS, Hitchcock ER, Gill SK, Beevers DG. Diurnal
variation of and activity during the onset of stroke. Neurosurgery.
1985;17:901–904.
206. Chae J, Zorowitz RD, Johnston MV. Functional outcome of hemorrhagic and nonhemorrhagic stroke patients after in-patient rehabilitation.
Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 1996;75:177–182.
Morgenstern y cols. Guías para el manejo de la hemorragia intracerebral espontánea 47
207. Kelly PJ, Furie KL, Shafqat S, Rallis N, Chang Y, Stein J. Functional
recovery following rehabilitation after hemorrhagic and ischemic stroke.
Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2003;84:968 –972.
208. Schepers VP, Ketelaar M, Visser-Meily AJ, de Groot V, Twisk JW,
Lindeman E. Functional recovery differs between ischaemic and haemorrhagic stroke patients. J Rehabil Med. 2008;40:487– 489.
209. Hemphill JC 3rd, Farrant M, Neill TA Jr. Prospective validation of the ICH
Score for 12-month functional outcome. Neurology. 2009;73:1088–1094.
210. Stroke Unit Trialists’ Collaboration. Organised inpatient (stroke unit)
care for stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007:CD000197.
211. Outpatient Service Trialists.Therapy-based rehabilitation services for
stroke patients at home. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003:CD002925.
212. Zahuranec DB, Morgenstern LB, Garcia NM, Conley KM, Lisabeth LD, Rank
GS, Smith MA, Meurer WJ, Resnicow K, Brown DL. Stroke health and risk
education (SHARE) pilot project: feasibility and need for church-based stroke
health promotion in a bi-ethnic community. Stroke. 2008;39:1583–1585.
213. Hawkes CA, McLaurin J. Selective targeting of perivascular macrophages for clearance of beta-amyloid in cerebral amyloid angiopathy.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009;106:1261–1266.
Downloaded from stroke.ahajournals.org at WKH on February 3, 2011
214. Schroeter S, Khan K, Barbour R, Doan M, Chen M, Guido T, Gill D,
Basi G, Schenk D, Seubert P, Games D. Immunotherapy reduces
vascular amyloid-beta in PDAPP mice. J Neurosci. 2008;28:
6787– 6793.
215. Morgenstern LB, Bartholomew LK, Grotta JC, Staub L, King M, Chan
W. Sustained benefit of a community and professional intervention to
increase acute stroke therapy. Arch Intern Med. 2003;163:2198 –2202.
216. Ratan RR, Siddiq A, Smirnova N, Karpisheva K, Haskew-Layton R,
McConoughey S, Langley B, Estevez A, Huerta PT, Volpe B, Roy S,
Sen CK, Gazaryan I, Cho S, Fink M, LaManna J. Harnessing hypoxic
adaptation to prevent, treat, and repair stroke. J Mol Med. 2007;85:
1331–1338.
217. Zhao X, Grotta J, Gonzales N, Aronowski J. Hematoma resolution as a
therapeutic target: the role of microglia/macrophages. Stroke. 2009;
40(suppl):S92–S94.
218. He Y, Wan S, Hua Y, Keep RF, Xi G. Autophagy after experimental
intracerebral hemorrhage. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2008;28:
897–905.
Downloaded from stroke.ahajournals.org at WKH on February 3, 2011 