JOURNAL OF GYNECOLOGIC SURGERY
Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
Mepivacaine Local Cervical Anesthesia for Diagnostic
Hysteroscopy: A Randomized Placebo-Controlled Study
NIKOLAOS MAKRIS, M.D., Ph.D., ANTONIOS XYGAKIS, M.D., Ph.D.,
MARIOS DACHLYTHRAS, M.D., CONSTANTINE PREVEDOURAKIS, M.D., Ph.D.,
and STYLIANOS MICHALAS, M.D., Ph.D.
ABSTRACT
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of local cervical application of mepivacaine hydrochloride for reducing pain associated with hysteroscopy. Among
the patients who underwent hysteroscopic evaluation over a 6-year period (1994–1999) at
the hysteroscopy unit of the First Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology of the University of Athens, in 245 anesthesia was necessary. In 45 patients, general anesthesia was decided on, for various reasons. The remaining 200 patients were randomized into two groups
of 100. Patients of the study group were given local anesthesia by local cervical injection of
mepivacaine hydrochloride, and patients in the control group received normal saline injection. All patients evaluated their pain, using an 11-point (0–10) analog scale, during the procedure as well as 30 and 60 min afterward. The use of local mepivacaine effectively and
safely reduced pain associated with hysteroscopy and endometrial biopsy, as the mean value
of pain assessment in the study group was notably inferior to that reported by the control
group. Still, when unpaired Student’s t test was applied for statistical evaluation, the difference was statistically nonsignificant. (J GYNECOL SURG 17:7, 2001)
INTRODUCTION
D
IAGNOSTIC HYSTEROSCOPY ALLOWS ACCURATE ASSESSMENT of intrauterine abnormalities as well as performance of minor surgical interventions. The usefulness of this method is currently well recognized,
and hysteroscopy is regarded as the state-of-the-art procedure for investigation of the endometrial cavity.1–4
The use of this examination on an outpatient basis is partly limited by the discomfort and pain that some
patients experience,5,6 thus requiring some form of anesthesia. Occasionally, as in cases of preexisting cervical stenosis or during endometrial biopsy, even general anesthesia may become necessary.
The use of paracervical infiltration has been reported but has not been widely accepted, as it is traumatic
and painful itself, while having the risk of intravasation of the anesthetic agent.5 The use of a local anesthetic into the uterine cavity has also been tested for pain reduction and prevention of vasovagal reactions.6–8
The aim of the present study was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of local cervical anesthesia with
mepivacaine hydrochloride in diagnostic hysteroscopy. The effectiveness of this agent for local pain relief
and the rarity of reported side effects in healthy individuals without cardiovascular diseases were the reasons for its use.
7
First Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Athens, Alexandra General Hospital, Athens, Greece.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS
Over a 6-year period (1994–1999), 1,320 women underwent diagnostic hysteroscopy, with or without endometrial biopsy, at the hysteroscopy unit of the First Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology of the University of Athens, on an outpatient basis, at a day-clinic setting of Alexandra Hospital.
The whole procedure was generally conducted without the use of anesthesia, as patients usually experience moderate or well-tolerated pain. Still, in 245 patients, the use of some kind of anesthesia was deemed
necessary, either for objective reasons or because of pain reported by the patients, or because they requested
anesthesia themselves.
The leading indication for hysteroscopic evaluation among our cases was repeat failure (three attempts
or more) of in vitro fertilization after embryo transfer, at the stage of implantation. In another group, the
procedure was performed just before scheduled in vitro fertilization (Table 1). Other indications included
abnormal uterine bleeding (either not related to a recent pregnancy or after spontaneous and induced abortions), secondary amenorrhea or oligomenorrhea, evaluation for infertility, and investigation of missed and
habitual abortions.
In menstruating patients, hysteroscopy was performed in the midproliferative phase. The standard procedure included oral administration or hyoscin (20 mg) and mefenamic acid (500 mg) 2 h preoperatively.
After placement of a vaginal speculum, the cervix was grasped with a single-toothed tenaculum, and a 2.7-
mm hysteroscope 25° (Wolf GMBH) connected to the light source, video camera and Metromat CO2 insuflator, using a 3.5- or 4-mm sheath, were inserted directly, without using a cervical cup, according to the
method described by Siegler.9 Occasional endometrial biopsies (10 for the study group and 7 for the control group) were performed by use of a flexible 1-mm biopsy forceps. Vital signs (blood pressure and heart
rate) were electronically monitored during the procedure.
In 45 patients, mainly nulliparous and/or postmenopausal, or having a history of laser cervical treatment,
general anesthesia was used.
The remaining 200 patients were prospectively randomized into two groups, the study group (n 5 100)
and the control group (n 5 100). The two groups were homogenous in terms of age, parity, and indication
for anesthesia. The ages of the patients in this study ranged from 27 to 57 years, with a mean of 35.4 years
for the study group and 36.1 years for the control group. The indications are given in Table 2. Local cervical anesthesia by injection of mepivacaine hydrochloride 3% solution (Mepivastesin ESPE) was applied
to patients in the study group, and normal saline injections were given to patients in the Control Group.
Both the mepivacaine solution and the normal saline were administered at a maximum volume of 3 ml
(range 1–3 ml, 30–90 mg) for each injection site, depending on the size of cervical tissue. The local anesthetic agent was injected up to 3 cm deep into the cervical tissue, at 2 o’clock, 6 o’clock, and 10 o’clock
on the exocervix, 1 cm laterally and parallel to the endocervical canal, using a 3-cm 23 gauge needle attached to an insulin syringe. Aspiration before injection, to avoid intravasation of the drug, was always performed. Hysteroscopy was started 3 min after the injection.
8 Makris et al. Journal of Gynecologic Surgery
TABLE 1. INDICATIONS FOR HYSTEROSCOPY IN STUDY AND CONTROL GROUPS
Study group Control group
In vitro fertilization
Failed 49 57
Scheduled 21 17
History of abortion
Induced 5 5
Spontaneous 5 4
Habitual 5 4
Missed 2 —
Abnormal uterine bleeding 6 3
Secondary amenorrhea 3 2
Secondary oligomenorrhea 2 6
Infertility 2 2
Total 100 100
Immediately after the procedure, all patients of both groups were given a paper containing an 11-point
scale, numbered 0 through 10, and were asked to rate the pain they experienced during hysteroscopy (T0)
by circling one of the 11 numbers. It was explained to them that 0 should mean they felt absolutely no pain,
and 10 should be used for intolerable pain. The same method was used for rating the pain level 30 min
(T30) and 1 h (T60) after the procedure.
The effectiveness of the cervical injection of mepivacaine, in terms of pain relief during hysteroscopy,
was evaluated by statistically analyzing the data obtained from both the study and the control groups. Student’s t test was used for this purpose separately for T0, T30, and T60.
RESULTS
The mean values of pain, as it was rated on a 0 to 10 scale by patients of the study and control groups
during and after hysteroscopy, are shown in Figure 1. It is clear that the use of local cervical anesthesia resulted in reduction of the pain experienced by patients during the procedure (T0), in comparison with control subjects, who received normal saline instead (mean 2.05 vs. 5.46). Still, the application of unpaired
Student’s t test showed that the observed difference was statistically nonsignificant.
The effect of the local anesthetic, although less apparent, lasted for at least 30 min (T30), and after 60
minutes all patients felt practically no pain. In both T30 and T60, the difference was also statistically nonsignificant.
All 100 patients of the study group tolerated the procedure very well without any major changes in blood
pressure, heart rate, or central nervous system symptoms. In no case was the procedure interrupted because
of the patient’s discomfort. The mean duration of hysteroscopy itself was 3–5 min with an additional 5 min
for the application of local anesthesia.
Volume 17, Number 1, 2001 Local Cervical Mepivacaine for Hysteroscopy 9
TABLE 2. INDICATION FOR LOCAL ANESTHESIA IN STUDY AND CONTROL GROUPS
Study group Control group
Postmenopausal cervical stenosis 21 18
Postconization cervical stenosis 12 9
Endometrial biopsy 8 10
Cervical adhesions (premenopausal) 27 24
Requested by patient 32 39
Total 100 100
FIG. 1. Mean values of pain, as rated on a 0 to 10 scale, by patients of the study group (mepivacaine) and control
group (normal saline) during hysteroscopy (T0) as well as at 30 min (T30) and 1 h (T60) after the procedure.
Two patients in the study group experienced vagal reactions in terms of bradycardia (patient 1) and hypotension (patient 1). One patient showed vagal stimulation, demonstrated by dizziness and fainting, without changes in her vital signs, which subsided with bed rest and use of the Trendelenburg position. Similar effects were observed in the control group (Table 3). No patient from either group needed to be
hospitalized. All patients left the hospital within 90 min after the end of the procedure.
DISCUSSION
Anesthetic agents for topical anesthesia have been used in various gynecologic procedures.5,7,10 It has
proved particularly helpful in endocervical, vaginal, and intrauterine endoscopic procedures.5–8
Pain at hysteroscopy depends on the degree of dilatation of the internal cervical os and the distention of
the uterine cavity. General anesthesia is sometimes necessary because pain may inhibit the patient’s cooperation, thus preventing successful completion of the procedure. It has been shown in previous studies that
topical anesthesia can significantly attenuate the pain experienced at hysteroscopy and prevent the occurrence of vagal reactions.8,11
Mepivacaive hydrochloride (30 mg/ml) is a drastic anesthetic agent used extensively in dentistry (ESPE
Mepivastesin). Among the reported side effects are rare symptoms from the cardiovascular system or the
central nervous system, usually in cases of accidental intravasation or overdose (more than 120 mg). Mepivacaine hydrochloride also has a local vasoconstrictive effect; thus, the addition of a vasoconstrictive agent
is not necessary. Zuppi et al.6 and Cicinelli et al.8 have reported successful reduction of pain associated
with hysteroscopy by intrauterine injection of mepivacaine, providing topical anesthesia of the endometrial
mucosa.
Our choice was to test the value of cervical infiltration with mepivacaine hydrochloride 3% in providing
even more effective anesthesia, adequate to perform a practically painless diagnostic hysteroscopy, with or
without endometrial biopsy. Additionally, we thought that its vasoconstrictive properties would result in
pain reduction not only during the procedure but also after it. We injected a relatively small volume of the
solution (1–3 ml), avoiding any increase in cervical volume that could cause an artificial cervical stenosis.
Our results confirmed this hypothesis and showed that infiltration of the endocervical tissue with mepivacaine effectively reduced patients’ discomfort and pain during and after hysteroscopy, allowing better
compliance by the women during the examination. General anesthesia was avoided in all cases when this
method was attempted.
It has been reported that topical anesthesia can reduce the incidence of vagal reactions caused by blockage of nerve endings at the internal uterine os.6 The absence of the side effects attributable to the anesthetic
agent in our study group, in comparison with the control group, confirmed the results previously reported
by other authors.
The decreased cost, the shortening of the hospital stay, and the avoidance of general anesthesia allow the
application of local use of mepivacaine hydrochloride in virtually all cases. Hysteroscopy can be easily and
safely performed on an outpatient basis by using our method. Only patients with increased anxiety associated with the procedure will not benefit from this approach.
CONCLUSION
This randomized controlled study shows that the application of endocervical anesthesia by using the local anesthetic mepivacaine hydrochloride is a reliable method for reducing pain associated with hysteroscopy,
10 Makris et al. Journal of Gynecologic Surgery
TABLE 3. SIDE EFFECTS DURING HYSTEROSCOPY IN STUDY AND CONTROL GROUPS
Study group (n 5 100) Control group (n 5 100)
Bradycardia 1 2
Hypotension 1 3
Dizziness 1 2
Fainting — 1
with or without endometrial biopsy. It is an effective and well-tolerated technique that can be used in an
ambulatory setting. Whether our method is indeed more effective than endometrial injection remains to be
proved. Our intention is to undertake a randomized double-blind study to this purpose.
REFERENCES
1. Valle RF. Future growth and development of hysteroscopy. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 1968;15:111.
2. Wheeler JM, DeCherney AH. Office hysteroscopy. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 1988;15:29.
3. Apgar BS, DeWitt D. Diagnostic hysteroscopy. Am Fam Phys 1992;46:195.
4. Downes E, al-Azzawi F. How well do perimenopausal patients accept outpatient hysteroscopy? Visual analogue
scoring of acceptability and pain in 100 women. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 1993;48:37.
5. Rylander E, Sjoberg I, Lillieborg S, Stochman O. Local anesthesia of the genital mucosa with a lidocaine/prilocaine cream (EMLA) for laser treatment of condyloma accuminata: A placebo-controlled study. Obstet Gynecol
1990;75:302.
6. Zuppi E, Marconi D, Cuciano AA, Maneshi F, Valli E, Romanini C. The use of topical anesthesia in diagnostic
hysteroscopy and endometrial biopsy. Fertil Steril 1995;63:414.
7. Rabin JM, Spitrer M, Dwyer AT, et al. Topical anesthesia for gynecological procedures. Obstet Gynecol
1989;73:1040.
8. Cicinelli E, Didonna T, Ambrosi G, Schonauer LM, Fiore G, Matteo M. Topical anesthesia for diagnostic hysteroscopy and endometrial biopsy in postmenopausal women: A randomized placebo-controlleddouble blind study.
Br J Obstet Gynecol 1997;104:316.
9. Siegler AM. Office hysteroscopy. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 1995;22:457.
10. Diakomanolis E, Stefanidis K, Rodolakis A, Sakellaropoulos G. Local vasoconstrictive effects of ornipressin (PORS)
in laser excision of the cervix. J Gynecol Surg 1997;13:187.
11. Finikiotis G. Side effects and complications of outpatient hysteroscopy. Aust NZ J Obstet Gynecol 1996;158:489.
Address reprint requests to:
Nikolaos Makris, M.D., Ph.D.
6 Semitelou St.
Athens 115 28
Greece
E-mail: Makris2@otenet.gr
Volume 17, Number 1, 2001 Local Cervical Mepivacaine for Hysteroscopy 11