Paracervical anaesthesia in outpatient hysteroscopy: a randomised double‐blind placebo‐controlled trial
W. C. Lau  W. K. Lo  W. H. Tam  P. M. Yuen
First published: 19 August 2005 https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-0528.1999.tb08274.x Cited by: 93
SECTIONSePDFPDFTOOLS SHARE
Abstract
Objective To evaluate the efficacy and safety of paracervical anaesthesia in reducing pain during outpatient hysteroscopy and endometrial biopsy.

Design Prospective, randomised, placebo‐controlled, double‐blind study.

Population One hundred women undergoing outpatient hysteroscopy and endometrial biopsy for abnormal uterine bleeding.

Interventions Paracervical block using 10 mL of either 2% lignocaine or normal saline before the procedure.

Main outcome measures Evaluation of pain at different stages of hysteroscopy using a visual analogue scale together with blood pressure and heart rate monitoring.

Results Compared with placebo, paracervical anaesthesia significantly reduced the pain only at the time of insertion of the hysteroscope, but not at the subsequent stages of the procedure. However, paracervical injection of lignocaine resulted in a higher incidence of bradycardia and hypotension.

Conclusions Paracervical anaesthesia not only fails to reduce pain during outpatient hysteroscopy and endometrial biopsy, but also carries a risk of inducing bradycardia and hypotension, which is probably a result of inadvertent intravascular injection.

INTRODUCTION
Outpatient hysteroscopy with endomerrial biopsy has replaced traditional dilatation and curettage under general anaesthesia for the investigation of abnormal uterine bleeding, as it enables the direct visualisation of intrauterine pathology1. It has been shown to be both feasible and acceptable in the overwhelming majority of cases2. However, pain at the time of examination and the risk of developing a vasovagal reaction are the main disadvantages of outpatient hysteroscopy3, 4. Different types of local anaesthesia have been used to reduce the degree of discomfort, and it has been suggested that the administration of a paracervical block may reduce pain5, but the evidence is not strong6, 7. We therefore conducted a randomised double‐blind, placebo‐controlled trial to assess the efficacy of paracervical block for outpatient hysteroscopy and endometrial biopsy.

METHODS
The study was approved by the clinical research ethics committee of the Chinese University of Hong Kong. One hundred women scheduled for outpatient hysteroscopy because of abnormal uterine bleeding were enrolled after giving written consent. They were randomised into two groups using a computer generated block number put inside a sealed envelope. Group 1 received 10 mL of 2% lignocaine solution and group 2 received 10 mL of normal saline. The randomisation and medication were prepared by a nurse who was not involved in the actual procedure. The attending doctor, nursing staff and the woman were all blinded to the identity of the medication used. The woman was placed in the lithotomy position and a bimanual examination was performed. A bivalve speculum was then inserted to expose the cervix, which was disinfected with antiseptic solution. The anterior lip of the cervix was grasped with single tooth volsellum forceps. Paracervical block was performed using a 22–gauge spinal needle and the solution was given at 3,5, 7, and 9 o'clock of the paracervical region, in divided doses. Hysteroscopy was started five minutes after the injection. No prior cervical dilatation was performed. A rigid 5 mm diameter hysteroscope with a 30” fore‐oblique view (Karl Storz, Germany) was inserted into the uterine cavity under direct vision. Uterine distension was maintained by a steady stream of carbon dioxide at 100 mmHg using a hystero‐insufflator (Wisap, Germany). The image was displayed on a television monitor so that the operator and the woman could see the inside the uterine cavity. Endometrial biopsy was performed using a 3 mm Kar‐man vacuum aspiration curette (Rockets Medical, UK) at the end of the procedure, if indicated.

The woman was instructed by an independent observer to record the pain felt at different stages of the procedure using a visual analogue scale (a horizontal line of 10 cm without gradations) when the cervix was grasped by the single‐tooth tenaculum; immediately after the injection; at the time of insertion of the hystero‐scope; during hysteroscopy with maximal distension of the uterine cavity; immediately after the endometrial biopsy; and 30 minutes after the hysteroscopy. Blood pressure, pulse rate and shoulder tip pain were recorded before, during the hysteroscopic examination at the time of maximal uterine distension, and 30 minutes after the procedure. A vasovagal reaction was defined as brady‐cardia (heart rate less than 60 per minute) or hypotension (a reduction in blood pressure greater than 20% compared with the baseline), associated with one or more of the following symptoms: dizziness, faintness, sweating, nausea or vomiting.

In a randomised double‐blind controlled trial of topical anaesthesia in a group of postmenopausal women, the mean pain scores were 11.5 (SD 3–5) and 13.4 (SD 3.2) in a 20 cm linear analogue scale in the anaesthetised group and the placebo group, respectively8. We therefore based our study on a sample size of 50 in each group in order to achieve a similar reduction in the pain score, with a power of 80% and a type 1 error (a) of 0.05. Statistical analysis was performed using Student's t test or the χ2 test where appropriate. A P value of < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

RESULTS
One hundred women were randomised to receive either paracervical injection of lignocaine or placebo. Hysteroscopy failed in one woman because of cervical stenosis, leaving 49 women in the lignocaine group and 50 in the placebo group. No procedure had to be abandoned because of excessive pain. There were no significant differences in the characteristics of the women between the two groups (Table 1). The primary indication for the procedure is shown in Table 2.

Table 1. Patients characteristics of the two groups. Values are given as n (%) or mean [SD].
Lignocaine group (n= 49)	Placebo group (n= 50)
Age (years) Parity	495.3 [10.7]	48.9 [9.1]
  Nulliparous	4 (8)	5 (10)
  Multiparous	45 (92)	45 (90)
Menopausal status Premenopausal	32 (67)	31 (62)
  Postmenopausal	16 (33)	19 (38)
  Procedure time (min)	11.9 [5.5]	13.0 [5.1]
Blood pressure and pulse		
  Before procedcure		
   Systolic (mmHg)	144 [24]	154 [24]
   Diastolic (mmHg)	78 [12]	83 [11]
   Pulse (per min)	75 [15]	79 [16]
  During procedure		
   Systolic (mmHg)	143 [21]	148 [27]
   Diastolic (mmHg)	78 [10]	82 [12]
   Pulse (per min)	76 [11]	76 [31]
  After procedure		
   Systolic (mmHg)	134 [20]	133 [21]
   Diastolic (mmHg)	77 [10]	77 [10]
   Pulse (per min)	75 [10]	76 [11]
Table 2. Indications for hysteroscopy in two groups. Values are given as n (S).
Lignocaine group(n= 49)	Placebo group(n= 50)
Postmenopausal bleeding	15 (31)	17 (34)
Menorrhagia	3 (6)	13 (26)
Irregular period	18 (37)	12 (24)
Intermenstrual bleeding or postcoital bleeding	8 (16)	5 (10)
Others	5 (10)	3 (6)
The mean pain scores at different stages of the hysteroscopy are shown in Fig. 1. The pain score was significantly lower at the insertion of the hysteroscope in the lignocaine group. There were no differences in the mean pain score at other stages of the procedure. Endometrial biopsy was performed in 31 (63%) and 29 (58%) women in groups 1 and 2, respectively. The degree of pain associated with endometrial biopsy was similar in both groups, but significantly more severe than hysteroscopy. The degree of pain experienced during the procedure was not related to the parity or menopausal status in either group.

image
Figure 1
Open in figure viewerPowerPoint
Pain scores at various stages of the procedure. Values are given as mean (SD). Po = Pain score before the procedure; P1 = Pain score at grasping of the cervix; P2 = Pain score after injection of anaesthestic or placebo; P3 = Pain score at insertion of hysteroscope; P4 = Pain score when the uterus is distended by carbon dioxide; P5 = Pain score after endometrial biopsy; P6 = Pain score 30 minutes after procedure. *P < 0.05; Student's t test.

No major complications occurred and no woman required hospital admission after the procedure. The incidence of shoulder tip pain was similar in both groups (16%vs 10% in the lignocaine and placebo groups, respectively). Symptomatic bradycardia or hypotension occurred more frequently in the lignocaine group (15/49; 31%) than in the placebo group (5/50; 10%) (χ2= 6.52; P < 0.05). All the women recovered spontaneously after a few minutes rest.

DISCUSSION
The role of hysteroscopy with endometrial biopsy in the investigation of abnormal uterine bleeding is now well established. It has a high detection rate of intrauterine pathology and can be performed as an outpatient procedure. However, pain during hysteroscopy remains a concern and is the commonest reason for failure to complete the procedure9. Vercellini et al.6 reported that the use of paracervical anaesthesia was ineffective in reducing pain and discomfort during outpatient hysteroscopy. However, the trial was not placebo‐controlled and the operators were subjected to possible bias because they were not blinded to the women's treatment. In a double‐blind randomised placebo‐controlled trial, the use of intracervical injection of lignocaine did not reduce pain during hysteroscopy7. However, a significant number of women in this trial found the injection as painful as the hysteroscopy. Our results show that injection around the cervix is also painful, and that the use of paracervical anaesthesia reduces pain significantly only at the insertion of the hysteroscope, but not at any other stage.

Dilatation of the cervix and distention of the uterine cavity account for the pain during hysteroscopy. From an anatomical point of view, the sensory nerve supply to the uterus is derived from two pathways. Franken‐hauer's plexus (parasympathetic S2–4) supplies the cervix and the lower portion of the uterus while the uterine fundus receives sympathetic nerve supply via the infundibulo‐pelvic ligament from the ovarian plexus10. Paracervical anaesthesia blocks the pain stimuli arising from the uterine cervix, therefore reducing pain during insertion of the hysteroscope, as shown in our study. However, paracervical anaesthesia fails to block the fundal innervation, and hence does not reduce pain originating from the visceral distension of the uterine cavity. Transcervical instillation of anaesthestic into the uterine cavity has been reported to reduce the pain associated with uterine distension during hysteroscopy and endometrial biopsy, suggesting that direct blocking of the nerve endings in the uterine wall may be more effective than a paracervical block8, 11

Endometrial biopsy using various vacuum aspirators has always been performed without the use of topical anaesthesia, and the pain induced is usually considered to be minimal. However, our results show that endometrial biopsy is actually the most painful part of the whole procedure, irrespective of whether local anaesthesia is used or not. Similar observation has also been reported in other studies7, 9. The pain may be related to the local release of prostaglandins which induce uterine cramps, resulting in somatic pain in the lower abdomen. However, the use of prostaglandin synthesis inhibitors has not been shown to reduce pain during hysteroscopy and endometrial biopsy1, 2.

In a recent randomised trial, the use of topical anaesthesia significantly reduced the incidence of vasovagal reaction from 32.5% to 5%*. Our study failed to demonstrate such a benefit, and the incidence of symptomatic bradycardia or hypotension was much higher in the anaesthestic group than in the control group. This is unlikely to be due to bias, as the hystero‐scopists, women and the pain assessor were all blinded to the randomisation codes and to the medication given. We believe that this side effect is probably the result of inadvertent intravasation of lignocaine rather than a genuine vasovagal reaction, supporting the observations made by Finikiot3.

The use of paracervical anaesthesia fails to attenuate the pain associated with hysteroscopy, and the injection itself is also painful and not without risk. The use of paracervical local anaesthesia in outpatient hysteroscopy cannot be justified.