British Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
July 1997, Vol. 104, pp. 842-844
Randomised placebo controlled trial of mefenamic acid
for premedication at outpatient hysteroscopy:
a pilot study
*Fritz Nagele Visiting Research Fellow, tGillian Lockwood Clinical Research Fellow,
*Adam L. Magos Consultant (Obstetrics and Gynaecologyl
*Minimally Invasive Therapy Unit and Endoscopy Training Centre, University Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology,
The Royal Free Hospital, London: fNuj'leld Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, John Radclifle Hospital, Headington, Oxford
An increasing number of diagnostic hysteroscopies are being performed in an outpatient setting.
Most women tolerate the examination well, but the single commonest reason for failure is pain. We
assessed the efficacy of a nonsteroidal, anti-inflammatory analgesic as premedication before
hysteroscopy in a double-blind, placebo controlled trial. Our results showed that 500 mg mefenamic
acid given one hour before hysteroscopy had no significant benefit in the discomfort experienced
during the procedure but did signficantly reduce pain after hysteroscopy. A larger dose or a longer
interval between premedication and hysteroscopy may possibly be associated with greater benefits.
Diagnostic hysteroscopy is now regarded as the
optimum investigation for abnormal uterine bleeding. It
allows complete visualisation of the uterine cavity,
directed or guided endometrial biopsies, and more
appropriate therapeutic management. Increasingly, diagnostic hysteroscopy is being performed as an outpatient
procedure. Despite the use of local anaesthesia,
the commonest reason for failure to complete the investigation is pain. For instance, in our series of 2500 outpatient hysteroscopies, 29.8% of women required local
anaesthesia, 3.6% of the hysteroscopies failed, and in
84% of cases this was because of excessive discomfort'.
The injection of local anaesthetic agents into or
around the cervix is not the complete solution to this
problem. We have already shown that intracervical
injection of lignocaine solution can be more painful
than the hysteroscopy itself. In another randomised
study Vercellini et al. concluded that paracervical
anaesthesia is ineffective in reducing the discomfort of
hysteroscopy and noted that it is the endometrial biopsy
which is the most painful part of the procedure.
As the above local anaesthetic regimens do not effect
the sensitivity of the uterine fundus, and the discomfort
of hysteroscopy may in part be related to prostaglandin
induced uterine contractions, it seems logical to use
prostaglandin synthesis inhibitors prophylactically for
the procedure. Mefenamic acid is widely used in gynaecology to treat dysmenorrhoea and would be expected
Correspondence: Mr A. L. Magos, Minimally Invasive Therapy
Unit and Endoscopy Training Centre, University Department of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, The Royal Free Hospital, Pond Street,
Hampstead, London NW3 2QG, UK.
to reduce the discomfort of the procedure. We therefore
studied the effects of mefenamic acid during outpatient
diagnostic hysteroscopy under double-blind placebo
controlled conditions.
Methods
Ninty-five consecutive women who were referred to our
outpatient hysteroscopy clinic and gave their informed
consent were included in this study, which was approved
by the local medical ethics committee. Patients with a
known sensitivity to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs and prostaglandin synthesis inhibitors, medication
with drugs interacting with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, inflammatory bowel disease, porphyria, and
those unable to provide informed consent were
excluded from the study.
Active (mefenamic acid 500 mg) and placebo tablets,
which were identical in appearance, were packaged in
coded bottles, randomisation being provided by the
manufacturer (Parke-Davis Medical, Eastleigh, UK).
The women were instructed to take their tablet orally
one hour before the hysteroscopy, and were told not to
use any other analgesia.
Immediately before the hysteroscopy the level of
anxiety, mood, lower abdominal paidbackache, and
shoulder tip pain experienced by the women were
assessed using a 10 cm visual analogue scale. The
hysteroscopy was then performed by a small group of
experienced operators using a standard 4 mm telescope
with a 30" fore-oblique lens and a 5 mm diagnostic
sheath. The uterine cavity was distended with carbon
dioxide via an electronic HAMOU hysteroflator set to a
842 0 RCOG 1997 British Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology 
SHORT COMMUNICATIONS 843
Fig. 1. Worst pain experienced during, immediately after (0 rnin),
and 30 rnin and 60 rnin after outpatient hysteroscopy assessed on a
4-point scale: 0 = no pain (a), 1 = mild pain (a), 2 = moderate pain (m) and 4 = severe pain (m).
flow rate of 45 mL/min and a pressure of up to
100 mmHg. Illumination was provided by a 250 W high
intensity cold light source, and the images were viewed
on a high resolution colour monitor using a chip camera
(all equipment manufactured by Karl Storz GmbH, Tuttlingen, Germany). The cervix was not dilated routinely.
If the procedure was uncomfortable at any stage, local
anaesthesia was given by injecting 10 mL of 1% lignocaine containing 1 : 200,000 adrenaline intracervically
up to the level of the internal 0s. An 8 mm operating
sheath was used for minor procedures, such as polypectomy or target biopsy. Endometrial biopsies were generally taken, if indicated, using a narrow metal curette.
The women were asked to score the worst pain
experienced during hysteroscopy, and their degree of
discomfort immediately after, at 30 minutes and
60 minutes after the procedure using a 4-point ordinal
scale (0 = none, 1 = mild, 2 = moderate, 3 = severe).
Lower abdominal paidbackache and shoulder tip pain
were specifically assessed using 10 cm visual analogue
scales. The women were also questioned about the
relative discomfort of the hysteroscopy compared with
endometrial biopsy if performed.
The data were analysed using the x2 and MannWhitney U tests, a result of P < 0.05 being considered
statistically significant. Odds ratios were calculated
using the program EPI-INFO (Centers for Disease
Control, Atlanta, Georgia, USA), with exact confidence
limits.
Results
The mean age of the women was 43-9 years (range
26-73). The most common indication for hysteroscopy
was abnormal uterine bleeding (84.2%), followed by
subfertility (7.4%); 83.2% of the women were parous,
and 115% postmenopausal. Forty-nine women were
randomised to the active drug, and 46 to placebo. The
two treatment groups were well matched with respect
to all the above characteristics, and there were no
differences in the reported anxiety, mood, or occurrence
of lower abdominal and shoulder tip pain before hysteroscopy.
Hysteroscopy was unsuccessful in four women (two
in each group): two refused because they were too
anxious and two procedures had to be abandoned
because of pain. These women had to be excluded from
most of the analysis except when comparing discomfort
during the procedure. The operative sheath was used
in 11 women, and endometrial biopsy was performed in
58.2%.
Compared with placebo, mefenamic acid did not significantly affect the worst pain the women experienced
during hysteroscopy or the pain at the end of the procedure (Fig. 1). As a reflection of this, a similar proportion
of women required local anaesthesia during the procedure (active: 25%, placebo: 28.8%; P > 0.5). In contrast,
there was a significant benefit of the active drug on
overall pain 30 rnin and 60 rnin after hysteroscopy
(active: median 1, lower-upper quartile 0-1; placebo:
median 1, lower-upper quartile 1-15, P < 0.01 at
30 min; active: median 0, lower-upper quartile 0-1;
placebo: median 1, lower-upper quartile 0-1, P < 0.05
at 60 min). Mefenamic acid reduced the odds of experiencing pain by 75% (95% CI 34-90) at 30 rnin and 71%
(95% CI 28-88) at 60 rnin following hysteroscopy.
Analysis of the visual analogue scales did not show
any significant difference in lower abdominal pain/
backache or shoulder tip pain at any time during or
after hysteroscopy even when allowance was made for
anxiety and mood (Fig. 2). Neither were any large
differences noted in pain experienced by nulliparous
compared with parous or by premenopausal compared
with postmenopausal women. 28% women in each
group found the endometrial biopsy more painful than
the hysteroscopy itself.
Discussion
As far as we are aware, this is the first time that a prostaglandin synthesis inhibitor has been assessed during
outpatient hysteroscopy. We found that mefenamic acid
appears to have minimal effects on the discomfort associated with the hysteroscopy itself or endometrial
biopsy but does significantly reduce the after-pains of
the procedure. While disappointing, this result is
comparable to the effects of a similar drug, naproxen
sodium, which in a placebo controlled trial was found to
significantly reduce backache and uterine cramps after
outpatient suction endometrial curettage, but again had
0 RCOG 1997 Br J Obstet Gynaecol 104, 842-844 
844 SHORT COMMUNICATIONS
lo r Lower abdominal pain Shoulder tip pain
8 c T IT I
T
IT I $1 T
A
O'H f,t,i H b 301 I ;I Active b i60 ! Placebo b i60
Active Placebo
Fig. 2. Lower abdominal and shoulder tip pain during (H), immediately after (0), and 30 min and 60 min after outpatient hysteroscopy
assessed using a 10 cm visual analogue scale. Results are expressed
as median and 75th and 25th centiles.
no effect on the severity of pain during the procedure4.
There is one observational study which reported that
prostaglandin synthesis inhibitors significantly lowered
the discomfort of colposcopy, but as admitted by the
authors themselves, the nonrandomised design and
lack of a placebo arm makes interpretation of this result
difficul t5.
Why is it that prostaglandin synthesis inhibitors,
such as mefenamic acid and naproxen, appear to be
ineffective in reducing the discomfort of outpatient
gynaecological procedures to a significant extent? Logically, not only should such drugs act directly as
analgesics, but indirectly they should also reduce
uterine contractility which may be another cause of pain
during instrumentation of the uterus. It is possible that
a better result would have been obtained had the
mefenamic acid been taken at least two hours prior to
the hysteroscopy as plasma levels peak between two to
four hours. Another explanation is that the analgesic
effect with respect to uterine manipulation is relatively
minor, and hence small studies such as ours and that of
Siddle et aL4 are not powefil enough to confirm the
true pharmacological impact of such premedication
(type I1 statistical error). Based on our results, over 500
women would have to be randomised to mefenamic
acid or placebo to show with 95% certainty that the
active agent was able to increase the percentage of
women reporting no or mild pain during outpatient
hysteroscopy from 10% to 20%.
Taking into account the possibility of spurious
positive outcomes associated with multiple comparisons, our much smaller study was, however, able to
show an advantage to mefenamic acid in terms of
post-hysteroscopy pain relief. This result is not only
consistent with the report of Siddle et aL4, but is also in
agreement with the numerous papers documenting the
post-operative analgesic benefits of prostaglandin
synthesis inhibitors after surgery under general anaesthesia. In the field of gynaecology, for instance, van Ee
et aLfi found in a double-blind randomised trial that
naproxen significantly decreased post-operative pain
and consumption of analgesics, and reduced hospital
stay and post-discharge abdominal discomfort after day
case diagnostic hysteroscopyAaparoscopy for infertility.
Conclusion
The results from this study indicate that premedication
with 500 mg mefenamic acid given one hour before
outpatient hysteroscopy is not superior to placebo in
reducing the discomfort of the procedure but does
significantly reduce post-operative pain. Better results
might have been obtained with earlier premedication.
An intra-operative benefit for mefenamic acid during
outpatient diagnostic hysteroscopy can only be confirmed by a very large study.
References
Nagele F, O'Connor H, Davies A, Badawy A, Mohamed H, Magos A.
2500 outpatient diagnostic hysteroscopies. Obstet Gynecol 1996; 88:
Broadbent JAM, Hill NCW, Molnf BG, Rolfe KJ, Magos AL.
Randomized placebo controlled trial to assess the role of intracervical
lignocaine in outpatient hysteroscopy. Br J Ohstet Gynaecol 1992;
99: 777-780.
Vercellini P, Colombo A, Mauro F, Oldani S. Bramante T, Crosignani
PG. Paracervical anaesthesia for outpatient hysteroscopy. Fertil Steril
Siddle NC, Young 0, Sledmere CM, Reading AE, Whitehead MI. A
controlled trial of naproxen sodium for relief of pain associated with
Vabra suction curettage. Br JOhstet Gynaecol1983; 90: 864-869.
Rodney WM, Huff M, Euans D, Hutchins C, Clement K, McCall JW.
Colposocopy in family practice: pilot studies of pain prophylaxis and
patient volume. Fam Pract Res J 1992; 12: 91-98.
van Ee R, Henrika DJ, Van der Linden CTM. Pain relief following
day-case diagnostic hysteroscopy-laparoscopy for infertility: a double-blind randomized trial with preoperative naproxen versus
placebo. Ohstet Gynecol1993; 82: 95 1-954.
87-92.
1994; 62: 1083-1085.
Received 28 March 1996
Accepted 13 September 1996
0 RCOG 1997 Br J Obstet Gynaecol 104, 842-844 