Lidocaine‐prilocaine (EMLA®) cream as analgesia in hysteroscopy practice: a prospective, randomized, non‐blinded, controlled study
Baldomero Arnau  Esther Jovell  Stephanie Redón  Marta Canals  Vanessa Mir  Elena Jiménez
First published: 09 May 2013 https://doi.org/10.1111/aogs.12165 Cited by: 5
The authors have stated explicitly that there are no conflicts of interest in connection with this article.
SECTIONSePDFPDFTOOLS SHARE
Abstract
We investigated the efficacy of 5% lidocaine 25 mg–prilocaine 25 mg/g cream (EMLA®) applied to the uterine cervix for reducing pain during diagnostic or operative hysteroscopy, using a visual analogue scale (VAS) for pain in a prospective randomized, non‐blinded, controlled study in 92 successive patients. Patients were randomized to either 3 mL of EMLA cream or 3 mL of ultrasound gel (placebo), placed endocervically and exocervically, 10 min before hysteroscopy. Intensity of pain was evaluated immediately after the procedure using a 10‐cm VAS. No differences were found between the two groups (p = 0.07). The number of women who wished to stop the procedure was significantly lower in the EMLA group compared with the control group (p = 0.013). We concluded that topical instillation of EMLA does not decrease pain during hysteroscopy, but does reduce a desire to abandon the procedure.

Abbreviations
VAS
visual analogue scale
Introduction
When EMLA®, a 5% lidocaine 25 mg–prilocaine 25 mg/g cream (AstraZeneca, Madrid, Spain) is applied to a mucous membrane, absorption is rapid, occlusive dressings are not necessary and the absorption from the mucosa occurs in 5–7 min compared with 1 h from the skin 1. The quality of analgesia decreases with longer application times 1. Van der Burght et al. 2 investigated the duration of anesthesia according to the time of application, verifying that the optimal time is between 5 and 10 min preintervention. In an exhaustive review, Munro and Brooks 3 concluded that better‐designed trials are needed because it is difficult to evaluate the efficacy of the analgesic methods published due to the limitations and variability of the protocols used. The main objective of this study was to compare the pain‐reducing effect of EMLA anesthetic gel with placebo during diagnostic or operative hysteroscopy using the visual analogue scale (VAS) for pain.

Material and methods
Power and sample size calculations were carried out on the basis of the results of our clinical practice. A difference of at least two points in the VAS with a highest standard deviation of 2.7 (B. Arnau, personal observation) in the reference group was regarded as clinically significant. Assuming an α error of 0.05, a statistical power of 0.95, and a 10% rate of loss to follow‐up, a sample size of 46 women in each treatment group was required (Figure 1). The study was approved by the research ethics committee of the Health Consortium (Consorci Sanitari) of Terrassa, Barcelona, Spain. Between January 2008 and December 2008, 102 consecutive patients scheduled for diagnostic or operative hysteroscopy were invited to participate, and 10 declined. Written consent was obtained following explanation by a trained physician. Prerandomization exclusion criteria were hypersensitivity or allergy to local anesthetics, age under 18 years and pregnancy. Postrandomization exclusion criteria were unbearable pain that involved other analgesic measures and allergic reactions to topical anesthetics.

image
Figure 1
Open in figure viewerPowerPoint
Participant flow diagram.
Women were randomized to the EMLA or control group using computer‐generated random numbers. Randomization was conducted with sealed envelopes containing computer‐generated randomization numbers. Forty‐six women were randomized to each group. All women (EMLA and control) were allowed to have a normal breakfast and take their regular medication. They were given 600 mg ibuprofen (if allergic, 1 g of paracetamol) and 5 mg diazepam 2 h before the procedure. Vaginal misoprostol was administered only to postmenopausal women (200 μg 6 h before intervention).

A 5.5‐mm rigid Olympus hysteroscope was used. Distension of the uterine cavity was accomplished using saline at a pressure between 100 and 150 mmHg delivered by infusion pump. The vaginoscopic approach described by Bettocchi and Selvaggi 4 was used for the practice of hysteroscopy, so avoiding a cervical tenaculum.

After the intervention, women were advised to rest for 24 h and prescribed analgesia with ibuprofen 600 mg or paracetamol 1 g orally every 8–12 h if needed.

Either 3 mL EMLA® cream 5% or 3 mL ultrasound gel (Transonic‐gel®; Lumadan SL, Cuenca, Spain) was applied in the endocervical canal 10 min before surgery, with a 5‐mL needleless syringe. A subsequent application of either gel was made with a swab at ectocervix level. The first application was made using a vaginal speculum, which was then withdrawn and the vaginoscopic approach was used for the second application, 10 min later. All women were asked to score the pain they experienced during the procedure using a VAS that consisted of a 10‐cm line scaled from 0 to 10 (0 = no pain and 10 = severe pain). Women were asked to verbally specify the number that represented their level of perceived pain intensity during the hysteroscopy immediately after the procedure. Women who completed the hysteroscopy were asked if they would recommend the procedure to other women, if they had wished to abandon the hysteroscopy and whether they would repeat the procedure if needed.

During the first visit to the gynecology clinic, all women were informed verbally and in writing of the study characteristics and were invited to participate, signed informed consent was obtained. The VAS was verbally administered immediately after the intervention in the recovery room. At 3–4 weeks after the procedure, women visited the clinic and were informed about pathological results of specimens obtained and about planned therapeutic intervention.

Statistical analysis
All women who completed the procedure and responded to the pain assessment scale were evaluated per protocol. The pain scores of the EMLA‐treated group and the placebo‐control group as reported by the women were compared. Student's t‐test was applied to compare quantitative variables of the two groups. Analysis of variance was used to check homogeneity of the data. When assumptions of parametric statistics were not met, non‐parametric tests (Mann–Whitney U‐test and Kruskal–Wallis) were used. A chi‐squared test and Fisher's exact test were applied to assess differences between the study groups for qualitative parameters. Results are presented as means ± standard deviation for quantitative variables and as absolute and relative frequencies for qualitative variables. All tests applied were one‐tailed, and a one‐sided p‐value of 5% or less was considered significant. The statistical package spss version 18 was used for data analysis (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Clinical Trials Registry: NCT 01094015.

Results
One hundred and two patients met the inclusion criteria and 10 refused to participate in the study. Ninety‐two patients were randomized, 46 in the EMLA group and 46 in the control group. One of the women in the EMLA group was excluded for protocol violation (Figure 1). Complications that appeared during hysteroscopy are shown in Table 1.

Table 1. Complications during hysteroscopy in women randomized to either preoperative EMLA® or placebo application
Control group (n = 46)	EMLA group (n = 45)	p‐value
n	%	n	%
Hysteroscopy failed	3	6.5	2	4.4	0.511
Paracervical anesthesia required	3	6.5	0	0	0.125
Interruption of test	4	9	2	4.4	0.349
Previous dilatation	5	11	7	15.6	0.363
Vasovagal episodes	2	4.3	0	0	0.253
Mean	SD	Mean	SD	
Number of previous hysteroscopies	0.26	0.57	0.42	0.81	0.276
Test duration	12.33	0.82	10.87	0.70	0.182
No significant differences between the two study groups were found for the most relevant parameters (age, history of hysteroscopy, indications for surgery, parity, misoprostol use, % of postmenopausal women). The procedure was divided into several stages for assessment of pain. The moment of greatest pain in both groups was the progression through the cervical os, for 31 (34.1%) in the control group and 29 (31.9%) in the intervention group. The average pain rating after the intervention was 5.41 (SD 3.23) in the control group and 4.24 (SD 2.91) in the EMLA group. No significant differences were found between groups (p = 0.07).

When asked whether they would recommend the procedure the women assigned to the EMLA group showed a slightly higher level of acceptance (51.9%) than the control group (48.1%). No significant differences between groups were detected (p = 0.106). Similar results were observed as regards willingness to repeat the procedure (91.1% EMLA vs. 80.8% in the control group, p = 0.115). Differences with respect to those who wished to stop the procedure were significant (n = 16, 35.6% of controls vs. n = 6, 13.3% EMLA, p = 0.013).

Discussion
Cooper and Clark 5, who conducted a systematic revision and meta‐analysis, concluded that paracervical anesthesia is the best method of pain control for women who undergo hysteroscopy, but is not problem‐free (injection itself is painful, vasovagal reactions, possibility of intravascular injection). He also concluded that the use of a local anesthetic did not reduce the pain. In contrast, a meta‐analysis 6 suggested a beneficial effect during and within 30 min after hysteroscopy. Other authors 7 who conducted a postal survey of UK gynecologists showed that although there is no consensus on the type of analgesia provided, intracervical blocks were commonly used as rescue analgesia.

The following anatomical observations prompted us to perform this study: anatomically, sensory innervation of the female pelvic organs is derived from the superior hypogastric plexus or presacral nerve, pelvic nerves and ovarian plexus; afferent fibers of upper vagina, uterus, proximal segment of the Fallopian tubes, bladder, urethra and rectum pass through the paracervical region and into the uterosacral folds and meet in the hypogastric and pelvic nerves. On this basis, paracervical anesthesia should block not only cervical pain but also uterine pain. We consequently opted for placing the gel both on the exocervix and in the endocervix to achieve an effect on both sites. The faster absorption of EMLA by the genital mucosa (vulvar) 1 and the optimal timing of preoperative application to obtain a good quality of analgesia have been demonstrated 2. Our protocol differed from that of Liberty et al. 8 regarding the time of application as we considered 10 min to be the optimum time for maximum quality of analgesia, and with respect to the sites of application. As the most painful step in the practice of hysterosalpingography has been described as cervical grasping 8, we assumed that the most painful step would be insertion of the hysteroscope through the endocervical os. Therefore we used the vaginoscopic approach 4, which avoids the use of a tenaculum, and instilled the analgesic into the cervical canal. Contrary to Stigliano et al. 9, we found no difference regarding the time of intervention; this may be due to the use of a gel in both groups.

The main limitation of our study was that it was not double‐blinded, as we were unable to prepare a placebo with identical appearance and texture to the EMLA gel in our laboratory. A second limitation was the subjectivity of patients' acceptance, as there are no objective parameters to assess pain. Despite the existing recommendations 10, 11 that hysteroscopy is better tolerated when a smaller diameter endoscope is used, we opted for a hysteroscope with a 5.5‐mm outer diameter because it allowed us to conduct small interventions (polypectomies, biopsies). This affected both groups equally and did not affect the results. There were no differences between the groups in the VAS scale, but a trend to greater acceptance of the procedure in the EMLA group was seen (p = 0.013). Topical application of EMLA gel 10 min before hysteroscopy does not significantly reduce the pain associated with this procedure.

Acknowledgements
We thank Drs P. Cristóbal, M. Cayuela and A. Rodríguez for their assistance in the performance of the hysteroscopies.