FEATURE
ARTICLE
Using Interactive
Computer Simulation
for Teaching the
Proper Use of Personal
Protective Equipment
PAN-PAN HUNG, MSc
KUP-SZE CHOI, PhD
VICO CHUNG-LIM CHIANG, PhD
The outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in
2003 affected thousands of healthcare workers worldwide.
As a lesson learned from the epidemic, infection control and
occupational health became an area of focus to safeguard
healthcare workers from infection hazards at work. The
use of personal protective equipment (PPE) is an important
approach to protect healthcare workers from acquiring occupational infections in healthcare settings. Examples of
PPE include fit-tested N95 respirators, goggles or face
shields, disposable long-sleeved gowns, and disposable
gloves. However, improper use of PPE may instead lead to
the spread of infectious agents among healthcare workers
and patients. Although guidelines on the use of PPE have
been developed, continuous outbreak of ward-related infections suggests the need to enhance the training of PPE usage
for clinical staff.
Many studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of
different types of PPE in healthcare settings and their benefits for both healthcare workers and patients.1,2 However,
it has also been shown that healthcare workers encounter
difficulties of differing extent in complying with the guidelines of PPE usage, where the lack of knowledge is one of
the key determinants. Reid et al3 examined the knowledge,
self-reported behaviors, and the barriers regarding the use
of PPE of the employees in a pediatric department. The
study found that 66% of the employees were deficient in
the knowledge of proper PPE usage, which was considered
a major reason for low compliance with the guidelines.
Similar findings were also obtained from a study by Sax
et al.4 As a result, even though PPE is used, lack of knowledge in donning and doffing may negate its intended effects
and instead increase the risk of infections. For example,
contamination can easily occur during the process of glove
CIN: Computers, Informatics, Nursing & February 2015 49
CIN: Computers, Informatics, Nursing & Vol. 33, No. 2, 49–57 & Copyright B 2015 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
The use of personal protective equipment is one
of the basic infection control precautions in health
care. The effectiveness of personal protective equipment is highly dependent on adequate staff training.
In this project, a computer simulation program, as a
supplement to conventional training approaches,
was developed to facilitate the learning of the proper
use of personal protective equipment. The simulation program was a Web-based interactive software
with user-friendly graphical interface for users to
practice the use of personal protective equipment
usage via drag-and-drop metaphors and respond
to questions online. The effectiveness of the computer simulation software was investigated by a
controlled study. Fifty healthcare workers were randomly assigned into two groups: one received conventional personal protective equipment training
only (control group), whereas the other also received
the same conventional training but followed by
using the developed simulation program for selflearning (experimental group). Their performance
was assessed by personal protective equipment
donning and doffing evaluation before and after
the training. The results showed that the computer
simulation program is able to improve the healthcare
workers’ understanding and competence in using
personal protective equipment.
KEY WORDS
Computer-simulated training & nursing education &
online learning & personal protective equipment
Author Affiliations: Faculty of Health and Social Sciences (Ms Hung),
Centre for Smart Health (Dr Choi), School of Nursing (Dr Chiang), The
Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Kowloon, Hong Kong.
The work was supported in part by the Hong Kong Research
Grants Council (PolyU 5134/12E).
The authors have disclosed that they have no significant relationship with, or financial interest in, any commercial companies pertaining
to this article.
Corresponding author: Kup-Sze Choi, PhD, School of Nursing,
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong
Kong (thomasks.choi@polyu.edu.hk).
DOI: 10.1097/CIN.0000000000000125
Copyright © 2015 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
removal if the required procedures are not followed correctly.
It is therefore necessary to educate healthcare workers about
the correct use of PPE and increase their competence. While
many studies have also raised the importance of infection
control training, particularly after the SARS outbreak,5 relatively few studies addressed the training methods and the
efficiency.
Personal protective equipment training is conventionally
conducted through lectures, demonstrations, and handson practice, with the aid of videos and printed materials.6
Recent decades have witnessed the increasingly important
role of computer simulation in training and education. It
has been considered as an effective and flexible way for
healthcare training in a variety of situations. A main advantage of computer simulation is its ability to provide realworld experience with a high level of realism and interactions,7 which enable experiential and active learning in
virtual environments. A number of positive outcomes in
training and learning with computer simulation have been
reported, in terms of learner satisfaction, realism, value, and
knowledge.8 Computer simulation is also a commonly
adopted training approach for the management of healthcare
institutions, attributed to the realistic scenarios simulated
with computers.9 Despite the benefits and popularity of
computer simulation in healthcare education, few studies
address the use of computer simulation in infection control
training, particularly the use of PPE.
In this study, a computer-based training program was
designed in attempt to complement conventional PPE training approaches and to enhance the donning and doffing
skills of the healthcare workers. The effectiveness of the
computer program was evaluated by assessing healthcare
workers’ compliance with the donning and doffing procedure before and after using the computerized method
for training. The details will be discussed in the following
sections.
METHODS
The Computer Simulation Program
In this study, a computer simulation program for PPE training was designed based on the infection control guidelines of
the World Health Organization10 and the local infection
control authority.11 The design of the simulation program
put emphasis on the essential techniques and the required
sequence of wearing and removing PPE. It simulated PPE
donning and doffing procedures for precautions against
airborne danger, where five types of PPE, including N95
respirator, face-shield, cap, gown, and gloves, were required.
The simulation program began by testing users about the
donning procedures, where a virtual changing room with
a healthcare worker preparing to put on PPE was shown
on the screen (Figure 1A). The five types of PPE were represented with the corresponding icons displayed at the
bottom of the screen. The PPE could be dragged by the
user with a computer mouse into the changing room and
put onto appropriate body parts of the virtual healthcare
worker to signify the donning of a PPE. The user was required to put on the five types of PPE following the correct
sequence. Animation of the donning procedure was played
when the correct choice of PPE was made. After virtual
donning of a PPE was completed, the user was presented
with multiple-choice questions (with animated insets for
each choice as shown in Figure 1B) about the use of that
PPE in order to test the understanding about the correct
donning steps. Visual prompts were invoked if a PPE was
selected in the wrong sequence or the PPE was put on
wrong body parts. The user could retry, request for a hint,
or give up and ask for the correct answer (Figure 1C). The
computer simulation program repeated the above procedure for each of the five types of PPE until they were
all put on the virtual healthcare worker. The simulation
was then followed by the doffing procedure.
Similar to the donning procedure, the correct sequence
of removing the PPE put on the virtual healthcare worker
was tested. The user was required to click on a PPE to signify
the removal of that PPE. For example, Figure 1D illustrates
the removal of the glove. When an incorrect choice was
made, a visual prompt was invoked so that the user could
retry, get a hint, or give up. The user was then challenged
by multiple-choice questions concerning the proper way
of removing that PPE (Figure 1E), followed by the playing
of animations of the removal procedure. At this point, the
user was also required to dispose the removed PPE to the
appropriate trash bin, that is, the one with lid on the right
in Figure 1F, by dragging the PPE icon with the computer
mouse. The computer program further required the user
to demonstrate the understanding of the need to wash hands
after disposing each PPE, schematically by clicking on the
virtual water sink with the mouse. These two steps—PPE
disposal and hand washing—had to be carried out after the
removal of each PPE. Failure would trigger visual prompts,
and the user was required to retry until the two steps were
correctly completed.
The computer-simulated training can be completed in
around 10 to 15 minutes. User performance was recorded
in terms of the completion time, the number of errors made,
the number of hints requested, and the score. A point deduction policy was adopted in the computer program,
where the maximum score of the training was 100 points;
five points were deducted for every error made (eg, picking
a PPE in wrong sequence, selecting wrong answer for a
multiple-choice question, disposing PPE into wrong trash
bin, or forgetting to wash hands); two points were deducted each time when a hint was requested. That meant
a user making excessive errors might have scored zero
points before the end of the training. A pop-up window
listing the top 10 users and their scores was shown on the
50 CIN: Computers, Informatics, Nursing & February 2015
Copyright © 2015 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
screen at the end of the simulated training. The computer
simulation program was a Web-based application, which
was accessible online with a generic Web browser. The Web
server was able to log the activities of the users and collect
user performance data.
Sampling
As healthcare workers in outpatient clinics are at risk of
contracting infectious diseases, the 24-hour outpatient department (OPD) of a private hospital was invited to participate in the study. The OPD is at the frontline of the
hospital, responsible for triaging patients and handling
different infectious patients before admission. Information about the study and consent forms were sent to all
healthcare workers of the OPD, including RNs, enrolled
nurses, and healthcare assistants. Those who agreed to
participate in the study, were able to read English, and with
basic computer operation skills were recruited as subjects.
The study was approved by the Human Subjects Ethics
Committee of the institutional review board.
Instruments
Two instruments were used in the study, including the PPE
donning and doffing evaluation form for measuring the
FIGURE 1. Snapshots of the computer simulation program: (A) user is dragging the N95 respirator toward the virtual healthcare worker; (B) a
multiple-choice question about the usage of N95 respirator is shown; (C) the system prompts the user for having mistakenly put a cap on the
worker right after wearing the N95 respirator (should first put on the gown instead); (D) user clicks on the glove to remove it; (E) a
multiple-choice question about the removal of the glove is shown; (F) user is dragging the glove to the trash bin with a lid.
CIN: Computers, Informatics, Nursing & February 2015 51
Copyright © 2015 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
subjects’ performance in actual gown-up and degown procedure and the IBMComputerSystemUsability Questionnaire
(CSUQ) for evaluating subjects’ satisfaction toward the
computer-simulated training program. The two instruments
are further described as follows.
The PPE donning and doffing evaluation form has been
and is currently used in the participating hospital to assess
healthcare workers’ gown-up and degown skills. It was
adopted in the study to evaluate the hands-on skills of the
subjects. The evaluation form consisted of two parts, concerning the donning and doffing procedures, respectively.
It was a checklist designed for assessor to record whether
the healthcare workers had carried out the required steps
and used the PPE properly during the process of donning
and doffing. For example, during the donning process, the
evaluation form checked if the healthcare worker had
ensured a PPE was intact and well-fitted, confirmed the
N95 respirator was properly secured around the face and
performed seal check, or whether the worker had fastened
the strings of PPE in correct sequence. In the doffing process,
the form checked if the removed PPE was kept inside out,
whether the strings of PPE were loosened in correct sequence, or whether the healthcare worker had disposed
the removed PPE into a proper trash bin and performed
hand washing. One point was given for an item in the
form if the corresponding step was carried out correctly.
Conversely, no point was given if the required step was
missed or not performed correctly. In the participating
hospital, the donning and doffing performance of healthcare
workers is considered satisfactory if they can correctly perform at least 90% of the steps specified in the items of the
evaluation form.
For the purpose of the study, the content validity of the
PPE donning and doffing evaluation form adopted was
reviewed by a panel of three experts on infection control.
They were, respectively, an academic specializing in occupational health, a senior nursing officer, and a deputy in
charge of an infection control department. The panel members assessed the content validity by rating the level of relevance of each item in the form using a 5-point Likert scale,
from 1 (very irrelevant) to 5 (very relevant). They also provided comments on the items. After the review, one item
was discarded from the original PPE donning evaluation
form because it was considered repetitive by the panel,
whereas the items in the doffing evaluation form were all
rated ‘‘very relevant’’ and thus kept for the study. Accordingly, the final version of the evaluation form used in the
study contained 16 items for the donning and 20 items for
the doffing section, and thus the corresponding total score
of the two sections was 16 and 20 points. The content
FIGURE 2. Research design.
52 CIN: Computers, Informatics, Nursing & February 2015
Copyright © 2015 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
validity index of the donning and doffing sections was
0.94 and 1.0, respectively, showing that the evaluation
form possesses good content validity.12
The CSUQ13 is a psychometric instrument designed to
collect subjective opinions and user satisfaction toward a
computer system. It contains 19 items and adopts a 7-point
Likert scale for each item, with 1 indicating ‘‘strongly agree’’
and 7 indicating ‘‘strongly disagree.’’ The items concern
general usability of computer systems from several
aspects, including ease of use, effectiveness, efficiency, productivity, information presentation and organization, interface, expectations of functions and capabilities, and
overall satisfaction with the system. The questionnaire has
strong evidence of reliability. In the study, the CSUQ was
adopted to evaluate the subjects’ overall satisfaction with
the computer simulation program.
Research Design and Procedure
An experimental study was conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed computer simulation program.
The subjects were divided into two groups, one receiving
conventional PPE training (control group) and the other
receiving conventional PPE training plus computer-simulated
training using the proposed simulation program (experimental group). The subjects were randomly assigned to
the control and experimental group of the same size. A
pretest-posttest design was adopted to study the effectiveness of the two training approaches by using the PPE
donning and doffing evaluation form to measure the
subjects’ performance before and after the training. A
survey administered by using the IBM CSUQ was conducted to evaluate user satisfaction toward the computer
simulation program.
The research procedure is shown in Figure 2. It began
with the pretest where the two groups of subjects were
required to perform the gown-up and degown procedures.
Their performance was assessed using the PPE donning
and doffing evaluation form by an infection control link
nurse of the participating hospital who was blinded about
the research. Next, the subjects of both the control and experimental groups attended conventional PPE training. In the
training, they received a 15-minute demonstration of PPE
donning and doffing procedures by another infection control link nurse. After a week, the subjects of the control
group were required to perform PPE donning and doffing
again. Their performance was assessed with the evaluation form to yield the posttest results. For the experimental
group, the subjects were asked to use the proposed computer simulation program to learn PPE donning and doffing.
To reduce researcher bias, three research assistants were
first trained to operate the computer simulation program
and then responsible for teaching the subjects in the experimental group about the use of the simulation program.
The subjects were expected to complete computer-simulated
training within 15 minutes. After another week, the subjects
in the experimental group were required to perform PPE
donning and doffing, and their performance was assessed
Table 2
PPE Donning and Doffing Evaluation Score
Experimental Group Control Group Between Groups
Procedure Time Mean SD P Mean SD P P
Donning Pre 13.52 0.653 .000 13.60 0.913 .000 .859
Post 15.08 0.493 14.56 0.821 .013
Doffing Pre 17.76 0.663 .000 17.28 0.980 .003 .055
Post 19.48 0.653 18.32 0.988 .000
Table 1
Demographic Data (Percentage in Parentheses)
Characteristic Range Experimental Group (n = 25) Control Group (n = 25)
Age, y 20–30 11 (44%) 7 (28%)
31–40 9 (36%) 9 (36%)
41–50 5 (20%) 9 (36%)
Rank RN 6 (24%) 6 (24%)
Enrolled nurse 5 (20%) 5 (20%)
Healthcare assistant 14 (56%) 14 (56%)
Nursing working experience, y 0–3 5 (20%) 10 (40%)
4–6 6 (24%) 2 (8%)
7–9 1 (4%) 0 (0%)
>9 13 (52%) 13 (52%)
CIN: Computers, Informatics, Nursing & February 2015 53
Copyright © 2015 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
to obtain the posttest results. Furthermore, they were also
asked to complete the IBM CSUQ to collect their subjective
opinion toward the simulation program.
RESULTS
Demographic Data
Fifty healthcare workers took part in the study. Eighteen
subjects (36%) were aged between 20 and 30 years, 18
(36%) were aged between 31 and 40 years, and 14 (28%)
were aged between 41 and 50 years. In terms of job ranks,
12 subjects (24%) were RNs, 10 subjects (20%) were enrolled nurses, and 28 subjects (56%) were healthcare assistants. Regarding their working experience in nursing, 15
subjects (30%) had 0 to 3 years of experience, eight subjects
(16%) had 4 to 6 years of experience, one subject (2%) had
7 to 9 years of experience, and 26 subjects (52%) had more
than 9 years of experience. The subjects were randomly assigned into the control group and the experimental group,
each with a size of 25. Demographic data for the two groups
are shown in Table 1. Statistical results indicated that there
was no significant difference in age (#2 = 2.03, P = .36),
rank (#2 = 0.00, P = 1.00), and experience (#2 = 0.08, P =
.78) between the control and experimental groups.
Personal Protective Equipment Donning
and Doffing Evaluation
The performance of the subjects in PPE donning and doffing
is shown in Table 2. As indicated in the last column of the
table, Mann-Whitney U test showed that in the pretest,
there was no significantly difference between the two groups
for the donning (P = .859) and doffing evaluation (P = .055),
whereas the posttest score of the experimental group was
significantly higher than that of the control group for both
the donning and doffing evaluation, with P = .013 and P <
.000, respectively.
On the other hand, Wilcoxon signed rank test showed
that improvement in donning and doffing performance as
observed in the posttest within each group was statistically
significant. For the control group, the donning score and
doffing score increased by 0.96 (P < .001) and 1.04 (P =
.003), respectively. For the experimental group, the scores
increased by 1.56 (P < .000) and 1.72 (P < .000), respectively.
Correlation analysis was conducted to study whether
the pretest donning and doffing scores of all the subjects
were related to the age, rank, and working experience of
the subjects. Refer to Table 3; analysis by Spearman >
showed no association between the pretest scores and the
three demographic variables. The same analysis was also
conducted for the posttest scores of the control and experimental groups, respectively. The results in Table 4 indicate
that the posttest score of the control group was significantly
associated with the age and rank of the healthcare workers,
whereas the score of the experimental group showed no
association with the three demographic variables.
Errors in Simulated Training
For the subjects in the experimental group, the numbers
of mistakes in answering the multiple-choice questions after
the completion of the donning or doffing steps were recorded
by the computer simulation program. There were, respectively, eight and nine multiple-choice questions for the
donning and doffing procedures. The statistics are shown
Table 4
Correlation Analysis (Spearman >) of Posttest Score and Demographic Variables
Variable Posttest Score Age Rank Experience
Experimental group Posttest score —
Age 0.30 —
Rank 0.203 j0.375 —
Experience j0.184 0.789a j0.397b —
Control group Posttest score —
Age 0.462b —
Rank j0.563a j0.679a —
Experience 0.133 0.731a j0.475b —
Posttest score = posttest score of donning and doffing evaluation.
a
P < .01. b
P < .05.
Table 3
Correlation Analysis (Spearman >) of Pretest
Score and Demographic Variables
Variable Pretest Score Age Rank Experience
Pretest score —
Age j0.117 —
Rank j0.069 j0.506a —
Experience j0.180 0.706a j0.443b —
Pretest score = pretest score of donning and doffing evaluation.
a
P < .01. b
P < .05.
54 CIN: Computers, Informatics, Nursing & February 2015
Copyright © 2015 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
in Table 5. A total of 43 mistakes were recorded for the
25 subjects, 10 made during the donning procedure and
33 at doffing. This means that on average the subjects
scored 95% and 85% in the donning and doffing evaluations, respectively.
User Satisfaction
Among the 19 items of the IBM CSUQ,13 the score of each
item as rated by the subjects ranged between 1 and 3 of the
7-point Likert scale (lower score means better satisfaction).
The lowest mean score was 1.4 (for four items), and the
highest was 1.9 (for one item), whereas the SDs of the scores
for the items were in the range of 0.49 to 0.78. The results
showed that the subjects were satisfied with the computer
simulation program, and the rating was consistent among
all the subjects in the experimental group. They agreed
that the computer simulation program was easy to use.
DISCUSSION
In this study, it was hypothesized that computer-simulated
training could improve the PPE donning and doffing skills
of healthcare workers. Refer to the results in Table 2; by
comparing the pretest and posttest performance of the
control and experimental groups, respectively, it is clear
that there was an improvement in donning and doffing
skills within each group, suggesting that the conventional
and computer-simulated training approaches were both
effective. However, when the posttest donning and doffing
performance between the two groups was compared, the
experimental group indeed outperformed the control group,
which indicated that the use of the computer simulation
program was able to further enhance the learning of proper PPE usage. On the other hand, after going through
either training approach, all subjects were able to achieve
the passing mark of 90% as required by the infection control
department of the participating hospital. This demonstrates
theimportanceofinfectioncontroltraininginraisinghealthcare
workers’ competency in using PPE.
In Table 3, the results from the correlation analysis
showed that age, rank, and working experience were all
not significantly associated with the pretest score. That is,
the competency of the healthcare workers in PPE donning
and doffing was about the same regardless of their rank or
nursing experience. As clinical skills require repeated practice to competence, high-rank and experienced healthcare
workers, for example, managers, may still be unable to use
PPE properly if they are not in the frontlines of care, whereas
senior clinicians are more likely to perform better. Coupled
with the fact that only a few of the subjects managed to get
the passing mark before the training, the finding brings up
the need for attention to raise the awareness of proper PPE
usage. It is therefore important for healthcare organizations
and nursing schools to provide appropriate PPE education,
and the proposed computer-simulated training is a promising
approach. On the other hand, the correlation analysis conducted with the posttest donning and doffing scores in Table 4
reveals that the conventional training approach was better
received by healthcare workers of higher rank. This may be
attributed to the stronger work experience they have that enables them to better comprehend the skills conveyed in the
conventionaltraining approach than the lower-rank healthcare
workers. This was not the case for the computer simulation
program where the posttest score were not related to age,
rank, and working experience of the subjects and thus a
more suitable PPE training approach for healthcare workers
in general while achieving a similar outcome.
It appears that the subjects were less familiar with the
doffing steps as evident from the fact that they made more
errors in answering the multiple-choice questions presented
by the computer simulation program on the doffing procedure when compared with that on the donning procedure.
Moreover, one-third of the mistakes were made in answering the questions concerning the removal of N95 respirator
(Table 5). In the computer simulation program, the noncontact technique for removing N95 respirator was adopted.
This is a new technique recently recommended by the local
infection control authority aiming to minimize hand contamination due to the removal. The results showed that subjects
were not accustomed to this technique. For example, the performance data logged in the Web server showed that the subjects chose to grasp the bottom tie with one hand, instead of
using both hands, as the first step of the removal of the N95
respirator(Figure 3). Given the relatively weaker understanding
of the doffing skills, more intensive training shall be provided
accordingly to enhance the knowledge of proper PPE removal.
Limitations
Despite a controlled trial and the favorable results, the
sample size of the study was relatively small, involving
only 50 subjects. If more subjects could be recruited
from other hospitals, the reliability of the study would be
enhanced. Stronger evidence could be made available to
Table 5
Mistakes in Answering Multiple-Choice Questions
Procedure Step No. of Times
Donning Wear N95 respirator 3
Wear face shield 1
Wear cap 4
Wear gown 2
Wear gloves 0
Doffing Remove gloves 4
Remove gown 5
Remove cap 8
Remove face shield 5
Remove N95 respirator 11
CIN: Computers, Informatics, Nursing & February 2015 55
Copyright © 2015 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
show that the computer simulation program was well suited
for healthcare workers in general, independent of their rank
or experience. In addition, the study lasted for 3 weeks
for the experimental group, and the subjects received the
computer-simulated training only once. It would be useful to
further investigate the virtual learning progress of the subject
when they received the training multiple times, as well as
the relationship between the intensity of the computerized
training and the performance in actual PPE usage, that is,
the effectiveness of the transfer of knowledge gained from
the computer-simulated training into real-world practice.
Also, while the present study has shown that the computer simulation system is advantageous for the training
of PPE usage, a cost-benefit analysis will be conducted to
further evaluate the effectiveness of the computerized training. In this regard, the major cost-related factors include the
human resourcesneeded to provide theconventionalinstructorled training versus the development of the software. The
benefits can be assessed from the training time reduction
and cost saving when compared with that required by
conventional training, which will be estimated quantitatively
with data obtained from a study specifically designed to
measure the number of times and the duration of computerized
training required to reach the necessary level of competency.
CONCLUSION
The study has demonstrated the effectiveness of using the
computer simulation program to facilitate the training of
PPE donning and doffing skills. It is an effective way to
complement and enhance the conventional PPE training
for healthcare workers and aid the strengthening of infection control and improving occupational health. This
simulation program is a Web-based application, which is
readily available and accessible online simply with a
generic Web browser. While the results of the study were
promising, a large-scale study shall be conducted to further
substantiate the training effectiveness, ensuring that the
knowledge gained from the virtual training is well transferrable to proper PPE donning and doffing practice. In
particular, subjects will be allowed to use the computer
simulation program multiple times over an extended period
so as to further evaluate their e-learning progress and
to study the retention effect. The current simulation program presented three-dimensional objects in two dimensions. To increase the virtual realism, a three-dimensional
version of the program will be developed to enable users
to visualize the PPE and the simulated scenarios in a more
intuitive way.
REFERENCES
1. Conly JM. Personal protective equipment for preventing respiratory infections: what have we really learned? Can Med Assoc J. 2006;175(3):263.
2. Chan JTS, Lau WHK, Wu YF. Confidence test for personal protective equipment. Hong Kong J Emerg Med. 2002;9(4):195–200.
3. Reid SM, Farion KJ, Suh KN, Audcent T, Barrowman NJ, Plint AC.
Use of personal protective equipment in Canadian pediatric emergency
departments. Can J Emerg Med. 2011;13(2):71–78.
FIGURE 3. Subjects picking ‘‘C. Grasp the bottom tie with one hand’’ as the first step to be performed for remove the N95 respirator while the
correct answer is ‘‘D. Grasp the bottom tie with both hands.’’
56 CIN: Computers, Informatics, Nursing & February 2015
Copyright © 2015 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.
4. Sax H, Perneger T, Hugonnet S, Herrault P, Chraiti MN, Pittet D.
Knowledge of standard and isolation precautions in a large teaching
hospital. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2005;26(3):298–304.
5. Lau JTF, Fung KS, Wong TW, et al. SARS Transmission among hospital workers in Hong Kong. Emerging Infectious Disease. 2004;10(2):
280–286.
6. Pang X, Zhu Z, Xu F, et al. Evaluation of control measures implemented in the severe acute respiratory syndrome outbreak in Beijing,
2003. JAMA. 2003;290(24):3215.
7. Strauss R, Kinzie M. B. Student achievement and attitudes in a
pilot study comparing an interactive videodisc simulation to conventional dissection. Am Biol Teach. 1994;56:398–402.
8. Weaver A. High fidelity patient simulation in nursing education:
an integrative review. Nurs Educ Perspect. 2011;32(1):37–40.
9. Cassidy CR, Kreitner R. Supervision: Setting People Up for Success.
Southwestern Cengage Learning: Mason, OH; 2010.
10. Infection prevention and control of epidemic- and pandemic-prone
acute respiratory diseases in health care (WHO Interim Guidelines).
2007. http://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/WHO_CDS_
EPR_2007_6c.pdf. Accessed November 30, 2012.
11. Guidelines on Infection Control Practice in the Clinic Setting. 2011. http://
www.chp.gov.hk/files/pdf/guidelines_on_infection_control_practice_
in_the_clinic_setting_dec_2011.pdf. Accessed November 30, 2012.
12. Polit DF, Beck CT. Nursing Research: Principle and Methods.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott; 2004.
13. Lewis RJ. IBM Computer Usability Satisfaction Questionnaires:
psychometric evaluation and instruction for use.Int J Hum Comput
Interact. 1995;7(1):57–78.
CIN: Computers, Informatics, Nursing & February 2015 57
Copyright © 2015 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.