Farm Pesticides
Outcomes of a Randomized Controlled Intervention to Reduce Risks
Melissa J. Perry, ScD, MHS, Peter M. Layde, MD, MSc
Background: In response to the multiple health risks that farm pesticide applicators experience and the
need for controlled trials to evaluate prevention programs, this study tested the effects of
a small-group educational intervention designed to increase personal protective equipment (PPE) use and to reduce direct pesticide exposure.
Design: A randomized controlled design was used with random selection of participants, random
assignment to intervention and control groups, and baseline and postintervention assessments.
Setting/
participants:
Four hundred Wisconsin dairy farmers certified to apply pesticides to field crops were
recruited to participate over a 1-year evaluation period.
Intervention: Three-hour educational sessions were conducted with approximately 100 randomly
assigned participants. Sessions targeted four educational messages: (1) existing evidence of
excess cancers among farmers, (2) simulation of pesticide exposure presented through
slide show and description, (3) feedback of self-reported data collected from the farmers
reporting on frequency of exposure and gear use, and (4) cognitive behavioral strategies
that can be adopted to reduce pesticide hazards.
Main
outcome
measures:
A change in use of required protective equipment use during application and self-reported
dermal exposure were evaluated in the control and intervention groups postintervention.
Results: Six-month postintervention analyses showed that an educational intervention had significant effects on the use of gloves and gear during the most recent application and an actual
reduction in the total number of pesticides used. However, the intervention did not have
a significant impact on achieving full PPE compliance nor in reducing the amount of
self-reported dermal pesticide exposure during the most recent application reported by
applicators.
Conclusions: This one-time educational intervention successfully increased protective equipment use.
However, more-intensive programs are needed to achieve greater reductions in personal
pesticide exposure. (Am J Prev Med 2003;24(4):310–315) © 2003 American Journal of
Preventive Medicine
Introduction
The acute health effects of occupational pesticide
exposure have been well documented, and information on links between pesticide exposure
and chronic diseases continues to emerge.1 However,
relatively little is known about the knowledge and
health beliefs of applicators that influence precautionary pesticide handling or about how to develop preventive interventions that effectively reduce hazardous
occupational exposures. In accordance with Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) guidelines, all states
administer training and certification programs that
limit the use of restricted pesticides to individuals who
have successfully completed a certification course and
written examination.2 The effectiveness of certification
programs and sales monitoring in preventing environmental contamination is evaluated in most states
through periodic tests of groundwater and wells. Yet
virtually no follow-up occurs regarding the safe handling practices taught during certification. For example, in many states re-certification is issued to private
applicators every 5 years through completion of continuing education credits or through written re-examination. Since periodic monitoring or site visits remain
infeasible, responsibility for safe handling is left to the
applicator.
From the Occupational Health Program, Harvard School of Public
Health (Perry), Boston, Massachusetts; and Injury Research Center
and Department of Family and Community Medicine, Medical College of Wisconsin (Layde), Milwaukee, Wisconsin
Address correspondence and reprint requests to: Melissa J. Perry,
ScD, MHS, Department of Environmental Health, Harvard School of
Public Health, 665 Huntington Ave., Boston MA 02115. E-mail:
mperry@hsph.harvard.edu.
310 Am J Prev Med 2003;24(4) 0749-3797/03/$–see front matter
© 2003 American Journal of Preventive Medicine • Published by Elsevier Inc. doi:10.1016/S0749-3797(03)00023-0
Prior work with dairy farmers indicates that precautionary handling is not routinely practiced when applying pesticides in farm settings.3,4 In one study, protective-gear use practices were compared to the specific
personal protective equipment requirements listed on
the label of each chemical to determine the percentages of full compliance (used all recommended gear
during application), partial compliance (used some
gear during application), and noncompliance (used no
gear during application).5 Of the three most common
pesticides used (dicamba, atrazine, and cyanazine), the
proportions of farmers who fully complied with the
gear recommendations were 8.8%, 8.6%, and 2.5%,
respectively. For those same pesticides, the proportions
using none of the gear recommended were 56.9%,
38.6%, and 47.5%, respectively.
A prior study on the influence of pesticide safety
knowledge, beliefs, and intentions found that knowledge levels were positively related to intentions, beliefs
and self-efficacy to use personal protective gear, but not
significantly related to risk perceptions and peer norms
concerning pesticide safety.6 Another study of psychosocial predictors and precautionary behavior found
peer safety norms, behavioral intentions, risk perceptions of cancer and other health risks, and postsecondary education were each positively associated with glove
use during application.7 In this study, interactions
between pesticide safety knowledge and postsecondary
education, beliefs, and intentions were found for use of
both glove and other protective gear.
Few studies to date have tested preventive interventions to reduce pesticide exposure hazards. A systematic review of the effectiveness of interventions in
reducing pesticide overexposure and poisoning found
that of the 17 studies identified, the majority were small
field tests of protective equipment involving 20 workers, and most of the exposure techniques evaluated
were not tested in actual worksite programs.8 No studies were identified that described prevention programs
on pesticide poisonings; most measured the effectiveness of protective equipment or handling methods on
exposure to pesticides by measurements of pesticides
penetrating protective equipment or entering the
body. Results of a Minnesota countywide educational
intervention that targeted individual applicators,
county physicians, elementary school youth, and extension agents showed modest increases in glove and other
protective equipment use in the intervention group.9
Although the study was conducted a decade ago, few
studies have followed in testing preventive educational
approaches at the community level.
In response to the multiple health risks that farm
pesticide applicators experience and the need for controlled trials to evaluate prevention programs, this
study used a randomized controlled design to test the
effects of a small-group educational intervention designed to increase personal protective equipment use
and to decrease direct pesticide exposure.
Methods
Study Design
In winter 1997, a total of 540 private pesticide applicators
were randomly selected for telephone screening to determine
their current pesticide application status and their willingness
to participate in a study on farm health and pesticide safety.
Active applicators were randomly assigned to the intervention
or control condition. They were administered a baseline
assessment at the start of the application season to determine
pesticide handling practices as well as knowledge and beliefs
regarding safe application. During the subsequent winter
season, the intervention group received a one-session intensive workshop on pesticide risk reduction, while the control
group attended the standard re-certification meeting. At the
beginning of the following pesticide application season, the
intervention and control groups were administered a follow-up
assessment to determine changes in handling practices.
Setting/Participants
Private dairy farmers residing in a geographic area composed
of six adjacent counties in Wisconsin were contacted by
telephone for interview. This geographic area was targeted
due to its ranking as the agricultural district with the highest
reported herbicide usage in the state. Respondents were
randomly selected from a list of all certified pesticide applicators residing in the target area. The designated sampling
unit was the individual farm owner, and respondents were
selected randomly using a PC-based random number generator (SPSS Institute, Chicago IL, 1998).
Telephone screening. Eligibility criteria for interview were
(1) being a dairy farmer (milked cows at least once in the
prior year); (2) residence in the six-county study area; and
(3) current certification to apply restricted use pesticides.
Final status codes were completed for 540 applicators; 30
applicators had incorrect contact information; and 28 could
not be reached after 10 attempts over a 2-week period. A total
of 450 were eligible to participate in the interview; 400
completed the interview and 50 refused. Overall interview
participation rate was 88.9%.
Eligible respondents were then invited to participate in a
study of farm health and pesticide safety. The study involved
completing a telephone interview after their first pesticide
application of the season; attending the winter pesticide
re-certification meeting, and completing a second telephone
interview after their first season application of the following
year. Respondents were offered $50 for their full participation in the two interviews and the re-certification meeting. All
400 respondents (100%) agreed to participate in the study at
that time.
Baseline/follow-up assessments. Applicators were interviewed over the telephone within 1 week following their first
pesticide application of the growing season in 1997 and again
in 1998. A total of 385 participants completed the follow-up
interview, with an overall response rate at follow-up of 96.3%.
Psychosocial risk assessment items were constructed to
measure pesticide safety knowledge, intentions, beliefs, risk
Am J Prev Med 2003;24(4) 311
perceptions, peer norms, and self-efficacy. Scale items and
psychometric characteristics have been reported previously.6,7 Scale items were examined separately rather than as
composite scores if the Cronbach’s alpha for the scale was
0.70. Knowledge items were based on information included
in the Wisconsin Pesticide Application Training Manual.10
Eighteen true/false pesticide safety and risk items were used
to construct the knowledge scale.
Six behavioral-intention items were asked concerning applicator intentions to follow precautions the next time they
used a pesticide. The response option ranged from 1 (strongly disagree) to 4 (strongly agree). The sum of the six
behavioral items was treated as a composite score representing behavioral intentions.
Four safety-belief items were asked concerning applicators’
beliefs about pesticide hazards. The response option ranged
from 1 (strongly disagree) to 4 (strongly agree). Each of the
four items was treated as separate dimensions of pesticide
safety beliefs.
Three risk-perception items measured applicators’ perceived risk of health hazards associated with exposure. The
response option ranged from 0 (very unlikely) to 10 (very
likely), and the sum was treated as a composite score representing perception of health risks.
Five peer-norm items measured applicators’ perceptions of
pesticide safety among other known farmers. The response
option ranged from 1 (strongly disagree) to 4 (strongly
agree), and each of the individual items was treated as a
separate dimension of peer norms.
Six self-efficacy items focused on applicators’ confidence to
avoid exposure and use required protective equipment during application. The response option ranged from 0 (not at
all confident) to 10 (very confident), and the sum was treated
as a composite score representing self-efficacy.
The structure of the pesticide-use questions was based on
questionnaires from prior investigations of pesticide exposure and cancer among farmers.11 The questionnaire employed a question series including 15 separate, restricted-use
pesticide chemicals: atrazine, dicamba, cyanazine, metolachlor, alachlor, imazethapyr, trifluralin, pyrethoid, terbufos,
fonofos, carbofuran, metribuzin, simazine, chlorpyrifos, and
diazinon. Chemical and trade names were indicated for each
pesticide. Information on the characteristics of first pesticide
application of the growing season included date of application; number of acres applied to; type of crops applied to;
types of application equipment used, including personal
protective equipment (PPE); and whether personal exposure
occurred. PPE use involved six types of protective gear
(chemical-resistant gloves, goggles, boots, apron, coveralls,
and respirator) during mixing, loading, and applying. The
personal exposure item asked whether any dermal exposure,
inhalation, or ingestion of pesticides occurred during the
application.
Randomization
Active applicators were randomly assigned to the intervention
or control condition by the principal investigator (MJP),
using a computer-generated randomization list. Intervention
sessions were scheduled in five separate locations chosen for
their proximity to residents in the six counties. Individuals
assigned to the intervention and control conditions were both
sent a reminder letter from the principal investigator to
participate in the upcoming re-certification meetings. Project
interviewers then contacted participants by telephone to
schedule their attendance at either the enhanced (intervention) or standard (control) re-certification meeting. Although the randomization to either the standard or enhanced re-certification meeting was an explained part of the
study at the time of recruitment, participants were never told
directly to which group they had been assigned. During the
follow-up interview, interviewers were blind to the treatment
assignment of the participant until the last question of the
interview, which asked what re-certification meeting was attended.
Intervention Administration
In winter of 1997–1998, 3-hour educational sessions were
conducted with 100 pesticide applicators in the Wisconsin
six-county study area. Five individual sessions were conducted
in separate sites, with attendance at each site ranging from 20
to 50 applicators. Sessions consisted of four educational
messages: (1) existing evidence of excess cancers among
farmers; (2) simulation of pesticide exposure presented
through a slide show and description; (3) feedback of selfreported data collected from the farmers to date, reporting
on frequency of exposure and gear use; and (4) cognitive
behavioral strategies that could be adopted to reduce pesticide hazards and ultimately cancer risks.
Intervention Session Content
Knowledge of pesticide-associated cancer risks. The laboratory and epidemiologic evidence on the carcinogenic properties of pesticides were summarized in a presentation format
for a lay audience. This presentation also highlighted epidemiologic data on cancer mortality rates among farmers as well
as Wisconsin cancer mortality rates.
Susceptibility to pesticide exposure. Slides depicting pesticide exposure were used to illustrate how pesticides contact
the body during the use of different levels of protective
equipment. The importance of preventing pesticides from
entering the body through inhalation, absorption, and ingestion was emphasized using information from prior biomonitoring studies.
Peer norms for safe pesticide handling. A respected farmer
from the area, identified through nomination on the baseline
assessment, was asked to speak to the group on how he had
incorporated safe handling into his pesticide application
routines. This component of the intervention proposed that
using a well-regarded member of a peer group (i.e., farmers
in a shared community) to endorse the desired behavior
change (i.e., use of personal protective equipment during
application) would exercise peer influence directly to encourage behavior change among the peer group.
Skills training to increase self-efficacy beliefs. During the
intervention session, time was spent demonstrating the
proper use of protective gear and safe handling practices.
The demonstration paid particular attention to how applicators can make minor adjustments in their application routines to easily incorporate these practices. For example, the
presenter suggested placing an extra set of disposable cover312 American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Volume 24, Number 4
alls and rubber gloves in several places for easy access (e.g., in
the barn, on the tractor, and in a storage box in the field).
In addition to the demonstration by a presenter, each of
the applicators were given the opportunity to experiment
with the protective equipment. This included trying on
respirators, practicing a brief check to make sure that all parts
of the body were covered, and timing each other to illustrate
how one can gear up properly in only a few minutes. The
objective of this component of the session was to give applicators time to acquire the skills necessary to practice safe
handling procedures.
Main Outcome Measures
Three dichotomous primary outcome measures were identified a priori and subsequently evaluated. The measures
follow:
1. prevalence of protective gear use (defined as use of any
gear other than gloves during the most recent application)
2. full compliance with the required PPE during the most
recent application
3. prevalence of self-reported dermal exposure during the
most recent application.
To define full compliance, use of long-sleeved shirts, long
pants, and shoes plus socks were assumed for all applicators
and were not counted as separate gear items. Depending on
the chemical, other required gear may have included chemical-resistant gloves, footwear, and apron; protective eyewear;
and/or an approved respirator. Gear use practices were
compared to the specific PPE requirements for each chemical
to construct a dichotomous variable of full compliance (used
all recommended gear during application) versus noncompliance (used some or no required gear during application).
Data Analysis
The main objective of this study was to determine whether the
educational intervention session increased safe pesticide handling and reduced pesticide exposure. It was hypothesized
that the intervention would significantly increase any PPE use
(other than gloves), including full compliance with all required gear, and would decrease dermal exposure as reported by participants 6 months postintervention.
Because there were no previous pesticide safety intervention studies to refer to in anticipating the effect size, specified
a priori was what was defined as modest yet satisfactory
increases in safety behaviors. Based on prior studies of PPE
use, which showed that gloves are more frequently worn than
other gear, it was anticipated that the prevalence of any
protective gear use other than gloves would be 40% in the
control group with a 18% increase in the intervention group.
Based on 0.8 power to detect a significant difference
(p0.05) and using an allocation ratio of 1:3, a minimum of
91 participants was required for each study group for a
two-sided test, and 71 participants were required for a onesided test. For evaluating full compliance, it was believed that
the prevalence of full compliance in the control group would
be 9% in the control group (as found in a prior study) and
there would be a 13% increase in the intervention group.
Based on 0.8 power (p0.05) and an allocation ratio of 1:3, a
minimum of 86 participants were required for each study
group for a two-sided test, and 67 participants were required
for a one-sided test.
Exploratory data analyses and parametric statistics, including Wilcoxon-signed-rank tests and chi-square tests, were used
to analyze the demographic data and assess the effects of the
intervention on knowledge, risk perception, perceived peer
norms, and self-efficacy beliefs postintervention. For assessing
whether this study was effective in increasing use of protective
gear and decreasing dermal exposure in the intervention
applicators while adjusting for relevant covariates, estimates
from multivariate logistic regression equations were calculated using the control group as the referent category. Due to
power restrictions and the risk of multiplicity, separate logistic regression equations were calculated for each of the five
outcomes: used gloves, used any other gear, full PPE compliance, reported dermal exposure, and decreased number or
pesticides applied. The latter outcome (i.e., decrease in the
number of pesticides applied) was not specified a priori and
was considered an exploratory outcome.
Results
Figure 1 describes the flow of participants through each
stage of the study. A follow-up rate of 96.3% (n385) of
study participants was achieved in the postintervention
assessment, thus providing a sample size powerful
enough to detect an intervention effect. Per protocol
outcome analyses were performed; these were restricted to only participants who fulfilled the protocol
in terms of eligibility, interventions, and follow-up
assessment. Table 1 compares the baseline demographic and pesticide application practices in the two
treatment groups, indicating there were no significant
differences between the two groups at baseline. Similarly, analyses of the psychosocial variables of interest
did not show significant differences between the two
groups at baseline (data not shown). All of the applicators were male.
Table 2 summarizes postintervention bivariate differences on the primary intervention variables of knowledge, intentions, risk perceptions, and safe pesticide
handling by intervention condition. Knowledge, intentions, risk perceptions, and other gear use were significantly increased postintervention in the intervention
group, whereas glove use was not significantly affected.
Table 3 shows adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) for safety behaviors by treatment, using the control group as the referent and
adjusting for age, education, farm size, and farm years
worked. Odds of glove use and any other gear use
during the most recent application were significantly
elevated for the intervention group. However, neither
the increase in the odds of full PPE compliance nor the
decrease in odds of dermal exposure at the most recent
application were statistically significant in the adjusted
models.
Am J Prev Med 2003;24(4) 313
Discussion
Reducing pesticide exposure in farm owners, workers,
and farm family members remains a significant challenge to occupational health practitioners. Family
farms are often isolated workplaces with only a few
workers, which makes health and safety outreach, monitoring, and enforcement especially difficult. The approaches necessary to minimize hazardous exposures in
farm settings require a departure from typical industrybased programs and must be recast to include more
targeted community-level public health initiatives.
In this study, which tested an educational pesticide–
safety intervention launched in community venues,
6-month postintervention analyses showed that the
intervention had significant effects on use of gloves and
gear during the most recent application and an actual
reduction of the total number of pesticides used.
However, the intervention did not have a significant
Figure 1. Flow of participants through each stage of the randomized trial.
Table 1. Demographic characteristics of pesticide intervention and control groupsa
Characteristic
Control
(n291)
Intervention
(n94)
Mean age 45.4 46.4
Mean years of education 12.8 12.6
Mean years worked in farming 40.7 40.0
Mean acres of land 429.7 403.1
Mean dairy cows 71.0 68.2
Percentage of pesticide applied
in past year
atrazine 20.3% (59) 28.7% (27)
dicamba 20.3% (59) 22.3% (21)
cyanazine 11.3% (33) 13.8% (13)
terbufos 13.4% (39) 9.6% (9)
a
No significant differences detected between control and intervention groups using Wilcoxon-signed-rank tests for means and 2 tests
for proportions.
Table 2. Comparison of cancer and pesticide risk knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors, 6 months post-intervention
by intervention condition (n385)
Knowledge, attitudes,
and behaviors items
Control
(n291)
Intervention
(n94)
Pesticide safety
knowledge mean score
13.0 16.0*
Pesticide safety
intentions mean score
8.2 11.5*
Risk perception
mean score
6.5 9.3*
Percentage of use of
gloves during most
recent application
62.5% 70.0%
Percentage of use of
any other gear
during most recent
application
40.0% 64.0**
*
p0.05 Wilcoxon-signed-rank test; **p0.05 2 test.
314 American Journal of Preventive Medicine, Volume 24, Number 4
impact on achieving full PPE compliance or on reducing the amount of dermal pesticide exposure during
the most recent application reported by applicators.
Several limitations in the design of the study should
be noted. A pesticide-exposure biomarker measured on
a subsample of applicators was originally included in
the design as an exploratory outcome. However, a large
enough sample of applicators applying only one chemical was not available for analysis, thus precluding the
corroboration of self-report with biomarker data. Although these findings relied on self-report data, differential rather than global improvements in outcomes
suggest that intervention participants were not likely
influenced by demand characteristics or biases in reporting. Also, the follow-up assessment was performed
separately from the intervention, and interviewers were
blind to the treatment assignment of the participants.
Finally, as with most experimental studies, other unmeasured sources of error could have influenced the
results. Although this study used randomization to
equalize the presence of other factors that could influence the effects of the intervention—and no significant
differences were found between the treatment conditions
on baseline demographic, psychosocial, and behavioral
variables—it remains possible that residual confounding
from unidentified sources could have occurred.
Potential threats to external validity were reduced by
random selection of participants from a large sample of
farmers and by high participation and completion
rates. The findings from this intervention trial would be
most generalizable to similar family farm communities
where personal pesticide application to field crops is
common; this could include dairy as well as crop
farmers. No adverse effects from the intervention or
control conditions were observed during the full period
of observation. The follow-up period of the study was a
long-enough time from the intervention to determine
short-term effects. However, a second follow-up assessment would have been optimal for determining maintenance effects.
The findings of this study suggest that it is possible to
have at least a short-term effect on pesticide application
practices and pesticide safety behavior by increasing
safety knowledge, intentions, and cancer risk perceptions. However, the educational/behavioral skills approach tested here did not have a significant effect on
self-reported dermal pesticide exposure or on achieving consistent full PPE compliance. It is unclear
whether actual pesticide exposure was affected by the
intervention due to the lack of sufficient biomonitoring
data available for analysis.
Owing to the lack of prior studies designed to achieve
pesticide safety–behavior change, knowledge of what
works in increasing pesticide-safety awareness and behaviors is anecdotal at best. These findings suggest that
a more powerful intervention program and evaluation
design is needed. The program format included both
cognitive targets, such as knowledge and risk perception, and behavioral targets, such as PPE-use skills. The
results shown here suggest that both types of targets are
important for effectiveness. One educational session
should be considered as inadequate exposure to the
intervention messages, and greater exposure may have
been more effective. Ideally, farm pesticide–safety interventions should be designed to include multiple
sessions, with periodic boosters to ensure maintenance
of behavioral changes over time. Density-sampling strategies targeting specific pesticide use may be necessary
to recruit adequate samples for biomonitoring assessments pre- and post-intervention.
This research was supported by grants from the National
Cancer Institute (RO1CA71083); the National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences (KO1ES10959); and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (R49CCR519614).
We are grateful to Janna Frelich for data analysis assistance
and to all of the farmers who participated in the study.
References
1. Zahm S, Ward M, Blair A. Pesticides and cancer. In: Keifer M, ed.
Pesticides. Occupational medicine: state of the art reviews. Philadelphia:
Hanley and Belfus, 1997:269–89.
2. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Certification of pesticide applicators. Title 40, Chapter 1, Part 171. Code of Federal Regulations. Washington DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1987.
3. Perry MJ, Layde PM. Sources, routes and frequencies of pesticide exposure
among farmers. J Occup Environ Med 1998;40:697–701.
4. Perry MJ, Christiani DC. Herbicide and insecticide exposures among dairy
farm pesticide applicators. Am J Public Health 1999;89:1118–9.
5. Perry MJ, Marbella A, Layde PM. Compliance with label requirements for
pesticide-specific personal protective equipment use. Am J Ind Med
2002;41:70–3.
6. Perry MJ, Marbella A, Layde PM. Association of pesticide safety knowledge
with beliefs and intentions among pesticide applicators. J Occup Environ
Med 2000;42:187–93.
7. Perry MJ, Marbella A, Layde PM. Association of pesticide safety beliefs and
intentions with behaviors among farm pesticide applicators. Am J Health
Promotion 1999;14:18–21.
8. Keifer MC. Effectiveness of interventions in reducing pesticide overexposure and poisonings. Am J Prev Med 2000;18:80–9.
9. Mandel JH, Carr WP, Hillmer T, et al. Safe handling of agricultural
pesticides in Minnesota: results of a county-wide educational intervention.
J Rural Health 2000;16:148–54.
10. Wisconsin Pesticide Applicator Training Program. Pesticide applicator
training manual. Madison: University of Wisconsin, 1996.
11. Hoar SK, Blair A, Holmes FF, et al. Agricultural herbicide use and risk of
lymphoma and soft-tissue sarcoma. JAMA 1986;256:1141–7.
Table 3. Adjusted odds ratios and 95% CIs of pesticide
safety behaviors by treatment, 6 months post-interventiona
Safety behaviors
Intervention
OR (95% CI)
Used gloves 1.23 (1.13–1.34)
Used any other gear 1.53 (1.05–2.11)
Full PPE compliance 1.10 (0.80–1.59)
Reported dermal exposure 0.86 (0.78–1.05)
Decreased number of pesticides applied 2.04 (1.52–2.75)
a
Adjusted for age, education, farm size, and farm years worked.
CI, confidence interval; OR, odds ratio; PPE, personal protective
equipment.
Am J Prev Med 2003;24(4) 315