2 78 The Iournal of Rural Health
Results of an Educational Intervention
to Improve the Health Knowledge, Attitudes
and Self-Reported Behaviors
of Swine Confinement Workers
Craig Gjerde, Kristi Ferguson, Connie Mutel, Kelley Donham,
and James Merchant
ABSTRACT Swine confinement workers participated in an educational intervention designed to improve knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors related to respiratory
disease. The desired changes were (1) improvement in knowledgeabout recommended
gas and dust levels in buildings and benefits of using properly fitted masks; (2)
improvemmt of attitudes about wearing dust masks, taking safety precautions, and
inspecting the ventilation and heating systems; and (3) improvement in behaviors
such as regular inspection of buildings and wearing an appropriate dust mask or
respirator. The health risks of failing to practice these behaviors include chronic
bronchitis, occupational asthma, organic dust toxic syndrome, chronic sinusitis, and
even death from acute toxicity related to hydrogen sulfide.
An intervention group and a nonintervention group of swine confinement
workers were assessed at the beginning of the project and one year later to determine
changes brought about by an educational intervention. During that year, swine
producers in the intervention group were mailed a series of six educational homestudy modules and reference materials on confinement topics.
Analysis of covariance and categorical repeated measures analysis were used
to determine changes over time in the percentage of people who answered correctly
in each group. Significant changes in knowledgescores, attitudescores, and reported
behavior scores all favored the intervention group. The 24 statistically significant
changes in knowledge items were related to dust mask use, manure pit safety, liquid
manure agitation, building gas and dust norms, and recommended gas levels. The
four attitudinal items that improved significantly concerned the importance of
regular cleaning and upkeep, improving health and safety, knowing ways to keep
buildings safer, and recognizing the benefits of wearing a dust mask. The four items
about self-reported behavior changes included inspecting and servicing of building
heaters, measuring building gases, and wearing a mask while working.
Thus, important changes in the intervention group occurred in all three
targeted areas-knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors. The results lead to three
conclusions: the educational materials were efective; swine producers are educable
* This research was funded by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute through grant
HL33128. Thanks to Paul McLaughlin and Manuel Arteaga for coordinating data analysis
for this project. For further information, contact: Craig Gjerde, PhD, Associate Professor of
Family Practice, College of Medicine, University of Iowa, S-201 Westlawn Building, Iowa
City, IA 52242.
The Journal of Rural Health
Volume 7, Number 3-Summer 1991 
Cjerde, Ferguson, Mutel, Donham, and Merchant 2 79
through a low-cost intervention; and educational intervention can improve many
factors related to the safety and health of confinement workers.
The human health hazards of raising swine in confinement buildings are
well documented (Donham, Zavala, & Merchant, 1984; Donham, 1990;
Donham, Merchant, Lassise, Popendorf, & Burmeister, 1990; Marwick,
1989). Health and safety education is especially important and should be
available to confinement workers. The work reported in this paper is part
of a larger study to assess the health environment in swine confinement
buildings and to make recommendations about safety levels and building
cleaning practices.
The aim of this project component was to improve swine confinement
operators’ health and safety-related knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors
through a targeted comprehensive educational intervention strategy. The
intervention design was based on the Health Belief Model, whose principles
have been shown in numerous studies to predict health-related behavior
(Janz & Becker, 1984). The Health Belief Model suggests that knowledge is
a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for health-related behavior and
that an individual’s attitudes about the relative risks and benefits of a
particular action are also important.
Specifically, the desired changes were improvement in (1 1 knowledge
about recommended gas and dust levels in buildings, benefits of using
properly fitted masks, and proper agitation of liquid manure; (2) attitudes
about wearing dust masks, taking safety precautions, inspecting and maintaining the ventilation and heating systems, and maintaining air quality;
and (3) behaviors such as regular inspection of buildings, use of vacuum
cleaners and power washingequipment, wearing an appropriate dust mask
or respirator, keeping people out of confinement buildings when agitating
liquid manure, and adjusting agitation level to the slowest speed possible.
The health risks of failing to practice these behaviors include chronic
bronchitis, occupational asthma, organic dust toxic syndrome, chronic
sinusitis, and even death from acute toxicity related to hydrogen sulfide.
Methods
Subjects. A preliminary survey of pork producers in eastern Iowa was
conducted to identify farms that used swine confinement. Four hundred
and sixty-five confinement farms interested in participating in the study
were identified. Of these, 121 farms qualified, based on worker exposure
time; 108 (89%) of the farms agreed to participate. Farms averaged two
workers each.
Swine confinement producers in seven southeastern counties in Iowa
were designated as the educational intervention (or treatment) group; this 
280 The journal of Rural Health
group contained 102 swine confinement workers. Producers in seven
northeastern counties served as the nonintervention (or control) group.
This latter group was composed of 107 workers. A tier of counties separated
the two groups in order to minimize dissemination of the educational
material to the control group. Details of the selection process are described
by Donham et al. (1990).
Educational Intervention. During the first year, swine producers in the
treatment group were mailed a series of six educational home-study modules, each designed to be self-contained with appropriate reference materials enclosed. Topics covered included confinement dusts and gases, human
health and confinement, hog health and confinement, measuring confinement dusts and gases, reducing confinement dusts and gases, and using
respirators in confinement. Reference materials included information from
an agricultural education series developed by the American Lung Association of Iowa (in collaboration with the Institute of Agricultural Medicine
and Occupational Health at the University of Iowa) and a laminated poster
containing recommended dust and gas levels (suggested for posting in a
confinement building).
Participants received a loose-leaf notebook to keep the educational units
and reference materials together, as well as periodic newsletters from the
project. Finally, they received a metal sign with the project logo to put on a
fence or post to identify their farms as participants in a university-based
study.
Intervention group members were also invited to attend one of three
evening sessions in which respirator use and gas measurement were
demonstrated. Ferguson et al. (1989) described the educational study
materials and methods more completely. Donham et al. (1990) described the
total project, including other health indicators studied.
Instruments. Data were obtained from the annual administrations of the
Swine Producer Survey, a written self-administered instrument containing
23 items that assessed the workers’ knowledge, 13 items about attitudes,
and 13 items on self-reported behaviors. Participants were administered the
instrument as a baseline measure (Time 1) and one year later (Time 2) by
mail.
Data Analysis. Responses to each item were categorized as correct or
incorrect. For the general analysis, a knowledge score, an attitude score, and
behavior score were obtained by determining the percent of correct responses to items of each type. Analysis of covariance was performed to
compare the two groups on each of the three scores at Time 2. The
corresponding Time 1 score was included as a covariate.
If the global analysis revealed significantly different means for the two
groups, a more detailed follow-up study was done of individual items. The 
Gjerde, Ferguson, Mutel, Donham, and Merchant 281
purpose of this analysis was to determine the changes over time in the
percentage of people in each group who answered items correctly. The
CATMOD program (SAS, 1985), was used to assess homogeneity of
marginals. The least-squares approach was used in the CATMOD procedure to test the differences over time and between groups, with time as a
repeated measure; it reports a X2 statistic (Wald statistic) with one degree
of freedom and a P value. A significant interaction between time and group
was indicative of a different pattern of change for each group. When a
marginal of zero was obtained, zero cells were replaced with the value of
0.001 to avoid computational problems in CATMOD.
Results
The intervention group included 102 confinement workers. Seventyseven subjects (75%) provided useful information on the Time 1 survey, and
68 persons (67%) provided complete information on the second administration. The nonintervention group included 107 workers. Ninety-five workers (88%) provided useful responses on the first survey, and 86 (80%)
completed the second administration.
Eighty-eight percent of the study participants were men. Seven percent
of participants had not completed high school, 47 percent had only a high
school education, 30 percent had some college education, and 15 percent
had a college degree. Eight-six percent were married. Median time working
on a farm was 15 years, and most had raised swine during a majority of that
time. An analysis of the demographics of the two groups showed no
significant differences with respect to age, education, years in farming, or
type of farming. More than 90 percent of the participants remained in the
project over the course of the four-year study; retention rates were similar
in both groups. About one half (49) of the intervention group workers
attended one of the evening sessions at which respirators and gas measurement were demonstrated.
Data appropriate for the chosen analyses were obtained from 49 persons
in the intervention group and 79 persons in the nonintervention group.
Thus, the CATMOD analyses are based on those subjects who answered
each item at both times.
Initial Conditions. Initial levels of performance were high on some
knowledge items and thus were difficult to improve. Almost 90 percent of
the subjects knew that dust masks did not protect workers from manure gas
hazards; 85 percent checked false for the statement, ”unless workers have
had bronchitis or other major respiratory symptoms they do not need to
wear masks in the buildings.” On the other hand, fewer than 10 percent
knew the recommended levels for gases and dust in confinement buildings.
Some initial attitudes were favorable as well and, therefore, hard to 
282 The journal of Rural Health
improve. More than 80 percent of the respondents disagreed that “smoking
is no worse for you than a lot of other habits,” were “concerned about the
long-term health effects of working in a swine confinement building,”
believed that “air quality is important to hog health and profit,” and
believed that “regular cleaning and upkeep of the equipment are very
important to maintain a healthy building environment.” Conversely, fewer
than 20 percent felt they were as careful about health and safety precautions
as they should be.
In terms of behavior, more than 80 percent initially reported they washed
down the floors in some buildings, did not enter the pit during or immediately after agitation, and used a power washer. Yet, few (fewer than 20%)
ran their agitator pumps at the correct level, vacuumed building areas, wore
a mask regularly during working hours, or measured gas levels in their
buildings.
Group Comparisons. Statistically significant differences in the percentage of workers who answered correctly in each group were demonstrated
on each of the three global scores. In follow-up analyses, significant differences were noted in the responses to many knowledge items, several
attitude items, and a few (albeit important) self-reported behaviors; all
differences favored the intervention group. Comparisons are reported in
terms of knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors.
Knowledge score adjusted means at Time 2 were significantly different-61 percent for the intervention group and 41 percent for the nonintervention group (F[1,1301=55.7, p=O.OOOl). Fourteen statistically significant
knowledge changes on individual items (Table 1) were related to gas
problems in buildings, dust mask use, building dust and gas norms, and
recommended gas levels.
Attitude score adjusted means at Time 2 differed significantly49
percent for the intervention group and 63 percent for the nonintervention
group (F[ 1,132]=7.4, p=O.OOB). Four individual attitudinal items (Table 2)
improved significantly; these included the importance of regular cleaning
and upkeep, improving health and safety, knowing ways to keep buildings
safer, and recognizing the benefits of wearing a dust mask.
Behavior score adjusted means at Time 2 were 53 percent for the
intervention group and 44 percent for the nonintervention group; the
differences were statistically significant (F[1,1751=8.9, p=0.003). Reported
behavioral changes (Table 3) were having building heaters inspected and
serviced for repair, wearing a dust mask or some type of respirator when
working, and measuring some gas levels.
To assess whether there was an association between holding proper
attitudes and self-reported behaviors about proper use of masks, a chisquare analysis was performed. A significant association (X2=10.7, df=l,
p=O.OOl) was found between attitude (“wearing a dust mask in the confinement building does not do much good”) and the self-reported behavior of 
Gjerde, Ferguson, Mutel, Donham, and Merchant 283
Table 1. Significant Knowledge Changes.
Item, (correct answer), percent correct at pretest;
at posttest by group; CATMODs X2 value; P
I = Intervention Group; NI = Nonintervention Group
1 Group NI Group
X2 P value
Disposable dust masks with one strap will trap most I=31%
airborne particles in confinement houses. (False) 61 %
x2 = 5.35
Workers do not need to wear masks unless they remain in I = 78%
buildings for more than three hours in one stretch. (False) 90%
x2 = 4.77
A dust mask will provide protection from manure gas hazards. I = 86%
(False) lOOY0
X2 = 6.33
Are buildings on most farms above the recommended limits 1 = 32%
for total dust? (Yes) 76 %
X2 = 24.84
I=5%
for hydrogen sulfide? (No) 86%
X2 = 30.96
Are buildings on most farms above the recommended limits I = 30%
for ammonia? (Yes) 54%
X2 = 10.33
Buildings without pits can have gas problems. (True) I = 75%
100%
x2 = 4.43
I = 42%
(Hydrogen sulfide) 93 9%
X2 = 15.1
I = 59%
82 Yo
X2 = 4.690
I = 11%
Are buildings on most farms above the recommended limits
What gas presents the greatest hazards during agitation?
Gases are not a problem in buildings unless manure is stored
in a pit under the slats. (False)
A shallower pit creates a greater chance of hydrogen sulfide
problems. (False) 47%
X2 = 8.62
The recommended maximum amount of hydrogen sulfide (in
parts per million) in a confinement building is: (0-10)
The recommended maximum amount of carbon monoxide (in
parts per million) in a confinement building is: (30-50)
I = 2%
42%
X’ = 23.35
I = 0%
32%
X2 = 20.90
I=9%
X2 = 9.26
The recommended maximum amount of ammonia (in parts
per million) in a confinement building is: (0-10)
The recommended maximum amount of carbon dioxide (in parts
30%
I = 2%
per million) in a confinement building is: (1500-2999) 27%
X2 = 7.89
NI = 21%
28%
P = 0.02
NI = 77%
78%
P = 0.03
NI - 91%
89%
P = 0.01
NI = 39%
29%
P = 0.0001
N1= 5%
5%
P = 0.0001
NI = 26%
17%
P = 0.001
NI = 82%
90%
P = 0.04
NI = 41%
43%
P = 0.0001
NI = 63%
65%
P = 0.03
NI = 12%
19%
P = 0.003
NI = 4%
6%
P = 0.0001
NI = 1%
3%
P = 0.0001
NI = 4%
3%
P = 0.002
NI = 0%
3%
P = 0.005 
284 The Iournal of Rural Health
Table 2. Significant Attitude Changes.
Item, (desired answer), percent correct at pretest;
at posttest by group; CATMODs X2 value; P
I = Intervention Group; NI = Nonintervention Group
I Group NI Group
X2 I' value
Wearing a dust mask in the confinement building does not do NI = 84%
much good. (Disagree) 84% 78%
P = 0.02
I = 70%
X2 = 5.19
Regular cleaning and upkeep of the equipment are very I=84% NI=98%
important to maintain a healthy building environment. 98% 96%
(Agree) X2 = 5.03 r = 0.02
There are things I could do to improve health and safety I=61% NI=58%
in the confinement buildings. (Agree) 76% 52%
X2 = 5.15 P = 0.02
Even though my building is not as safe as it can be, I'm not I=20% NI=28%
sure what to do. (Disagree) 35% 24%
X2 = 4.23 P = 0.04
"sometimes" or "always" in response to "how often do you wear a dust
mask while in the confinement buildings?" Seventy-five percent of the
workers with the correct attitude (disagreement with the statement) reported wearing masks; 75 percent of those who reported an incorrect
attitude reported never wearing a dust mask.
Discussion
Important changes occurred in all three targeted areas-knowledge,
attitudes, and reported behaviors subsequent to the targeted educational
intervention. These changes are summarized in Figure 1. These results lead
to three conclusions. First, the educational intervention was effective,
especially in increasing knowledge. The information and argumentation
provided in the booklets demonstrated what to do, changed some attitudes,
and motivated the workers to modify some of their behaviors. Interest in
obtaining safer equipment encouraged local vendors to stock recommended
products such as two-strap dust masks.
Second, workers were educable and responded to a low-cost intervention. The booklets were read. Many of the workers took the time to study the
units, complete the extensive instruments, and attend the evening demonstration. Workers also took time to provide feedback which was used to 
Gjerde, Ferguson, Mutel, Donham, and Merchant 285
Table 3. Significant Behavioral Changes.
Item, (desired answer), percent correct at pretest;
at posttest by group; CATMODs X2 value; P
I = Intervention Group; NI = Nonintervention Group
I Group NI Group
X2 P value
Wear a dust mask or some type of respirator while working.
(Yes)
How many times per year are building heaters inspected and
serviced for repair. (More)
How many times per year are the carbon dioxide levels in the
buildings measured? (More)
I = 65%
73%
x2 = 4.93
I = 58%
92%
x2 = 4.34
I=O%
12%
X2 = 5.87
NI = 83%
74%
P = 0.03
NI = 72%
83%
P = 0.04
NI = 1%
1%
P = 0.02
How many times per year are the carbon monoxide levels in the I = 0%
X2 = 4.68
NI = 1%
P = 0.03
buildings measured? (More) 10% 1%
Figure 1. Summary of Gains in Knowledge, Attitudes, and
Self-reported Behavior in Swine Farmers.
Knowledge
Effectiveness of respirators
Sources of hazardous substances
Unsafe work practices
Usual versus safe concentrations
Proper selection and use of respirators
Safe concentrations of dust and gas
Attitudes
Priority for cleaning and maintenance
Feeling they can decrease hazards
Feeling they can improve health and safety
Recognition of importance of wearing a gas mask in confinement buildings
Self-reported Behavior
Wear respirator or mask while working
Assess gases in work environment
Inspect and service building heaters
Inspect and maintain ventilation and heating systems 
286 The journal of Rural Health
improve the educational units before they were later made available to the
nonintervention group.
Third, while the educational intervention was effective in demonstrating
statistically significant improvements in many factors related to the safety
and health of confinement workers, further interventions will be required
to achieve other program goals. Some content areas reached 80 to 100
percent correct on the posttest (for example, identifying hydrogen sulfide as
a dangerous gas during agitation); other areas, such as knowing the actual
numbers for recommended maximum gas levels, showed improvement,
but only to the 20 to 40 percent level. Thus, some targeted content areas need
continued reinforcement through other components of the project.
While these results show significant improvement in a number of
important areas, they should be interpreted with some caution. Because
participants were volunteers selected from among those farms eligible to
participate, the results may not be generalizable to farmers who have not
expressed at least some interest in learning more about health and safety. In
addition, findings regarding behavior change were based on self-reporting
rather than observed behavior. Reporting bias may have been introduced.
However, given these limitations, the data suggest that this educational
intervention produced important effects in instructing swine confinement
workers about safer and healthier work practices.
REFERENCES
Donham, K.J. (1990). Health effects from work in swine confinement buildings. American
lourtial of Industrial Medicine, 17, 17-25.
Donham, K.J., Merchant, J.A., Lassise, D., Popendorf, W.J., & Burmeister, L. (1990). Prevention
of respiratory disease in swine confinement workers: Intervention through applied epidemiology, education and consultation. American journal of Industrial Medicine, 18,241-246.
Donham, K.J., Zavala, D.C., & Merchant, 1. (1984). Acute effects of the work environment on
pulmonary functions of swine confinement workers. American journal of Industrial Medicine, 5, 367-375.
Ferguson, K.J., Gjerde, C.L., Mutel, C., Donham, K.J., Hradek, C., Johansen, K., & Merchant, J.
(1989). An educational intervention program for prevention of occupational illness in
agricultural workers. Journal of Rural Health, 5 (I), 33-47.
Janz, N.K., & Becker, M.H. (1984). The health belief model: A decade later. Health Education
Quarterly, 11 (l), 1-47.
Marwick, C. (1989). Educating farmers, physicians who treat them, about rural life’s potential
health hazards. journal of the American Medical Association, 261 (3), 343.
SAS Institute Inc. (1985). SAS user’sguide: Statistics (5th ed.). Cary, NC: Author. 