Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=uoeh20
Applied Occupational and Environmental Hygiene
ISSN: 1047-322X (Print) 1521-0898 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/uaoh20
Effectiveness of Fit Check Methods on Half Mask
Respirators
Warren R. Myers , Majid Jaraiedi & Lynnette Hendricks
To cite this article: Warren R. Myers , Majid Jaraiedi & Lynnette Hendricks (1995) Effectiveness
of Fit Check Methods on Half Mask Respirators, Applied Occupational and Environmental Hygiene,
10:11, 934-942, DOI: 10.1080/1047322X.1995.10387716
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/1047322X.1995.10387716
Published online: 24 Feb 2011.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 46
View related articles
Citing articles: 9 View citing articles 
Effectiveness of Fit Check
Methods on Half Mask Respirators
Warren R. Myers,* Majid Jaraiedi,A and Lynnette Hendrickp
ACollege of Engineering, West Virginia University, Morgantown,
West Virginia 26506; BNuclear Energy Institute, Washington, DC
Studies were conducted to evaluate whether a positive/negative
(+I-) fit check was an effective aid in helping users of respiratory
protective equipment (RPE) achieve a good fit when donning the
WE. Two types of half-facepiece RPE were used in the studies: the
disposable, filtering facepiece and the elastomeric facepiece. Three
models of disposable, filtering facepiece and one model of dual-cartridge, elastomeric facepiece were evaluated. A population of 64 inexperienced users of WE was randomly divided into two equal
groups. One group was trained to don the RPE using the +/- fit
check as an aid, while the second group was trained to don the WE
without conducting a +/- fit check. The number of successful RPE
donnings achieved in the group using the fit check was compared
with the number of successful RPE donnings achieved in the group
not using a fit check. The data obtained &om this experiment suggested that, in general, fewer unsuccessful donnings and more consistent donnings were obtained by WE users when fit checks were
used as an aid in donning both general types of RPE used in the study.
This implies that a +/- fit check has value in assisting the wearer of
a disposable filtering facepiece or a half mask to properly don the
RPE. On a second population of 64 inexperienced users of RPE, the
padfail outcome of fit checks was used to measure the discriminatory power of fit checks. The subjects used the +/- fit check to
discriminate whether the fit of WE preadjusted by the experimenters
was good or bad. Fit checks were found to be fairy useful, easy-tolearn tools for respirator wearers to discriminate between good and
poor donnings. MYERS, W.R.; JARAIEDI, M.; HENDRICKS, L.: EFFEC~MNESS OF Frr
CHECK Mrmoos ON HAF MASK RESARATORS. h. OCCUP. ENVIRON. HYG.
1 O( 1 1 ):934-942; 1 995.
urrent regulations, standards, and recommendations ad- C dressing use and selection of respiratory protective equipment (RPE) require that individual users be fit tested as part of
the selection process and also that they be able to conduct fit
checks when donning the RPE.(l”)
The 1980 American National Standard for Respirator Protection recommends that each RPE wearer undergo and pass a
quantitative or qualitative fit test as part of the selection process
and be required to check the seal of the respirator by appropriate means prior to entering a harmful atmosphere.(l) The
standard states that to check the seal the wearer should use
procedures recommended by the respirator’s manufacturer or
by any of several field tests which are subsequently described.
Among the field tests listed was a negative and/or positive
pressure sealing test. Historical referencing of negative and
positive sealing test procedures in American Industrial Hygiene
Association/American Conference of Governmental Industrial
Hygienists and American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
recommendations and standards is traced in Table 1.
After a worker has been fit tested and assigned a respirator,
the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration’s
(OSHA) RPE standard 29 CFR 1910.134(e)(5)(i) states,
“. . . To assure proper protection, the facepiece fit shall be
checked by the wearer each time he puts on the respirator.
This may be done by following the manufacturer’s facepiece
fitting instruction^."(^)
The 1992 American National Standard for Respirator Protection defines a fit check as a test conducted by the wearer to
determine if the respirator is properly seated to the face and is
performed by appropriate means each time the respirator is
donned or adjusted, “appropriate means” being the procedures
recommended by the manufacturer or by checks described in
the standard.(3)
Based on current practice and terminology, a fit test is
conducted to assess the fit of the RPE during the initial
selection process or during follow-up fit tests typically conducted at 6-month or yearly intervals. In contrast to a fit test,
a fit check is a simpler procedure that does not require additional equipment. The fit check is for the user of an already
properly fit RPE to use with each donning to ascertain or
check that the RPE is properly set on the face. The appropriate
understanding of a fit check is that it is an adjunct to the formal
process of fit testing, a tool to aid with each donning of the
RPE.
While the ANSI standards mention several fit check procedures, the authors are aware of only the positive and/or
negative pressure fit check procedures being commonly used
or recommended by manufacturers of RPE. In general, the
end point of these tests is to be able to maintain a +/-
pressure within the facepiece for a few seconds or to be able to
detect face seal leakage associated with an increased +/-
pressure.
To check for maintenance of negative pressure, the user
typically blocks off the air inlet(s), inhales sharply so that the
mask collapses slightly, briefly holds the inhalation, and determines if a negative pressure is maintained inside the RPE for a
few seconds and/or there is no detection of in-board air
coming in the face seal. The positive pressure sealing test is
performed similarly. The wearer blocks off the air outlet,
exhales slightly to cause the RPE to inflate, briefly holds the
exhalation, and then determines if a positive pressure is maintained inside the RPE for a few seconds and/or there is no
934 APPL.OCCUP.ENVIR0N.HYG. lO(11) - NOVEMBER 1995 * 1047-322X/95/1011-934$9.50/9 0 1995 AIH - SSDI 1047-322X(95)00207-J 
APPL.OCCUP. ENVIRON.HYG.
lO(11) NOVEMBER 1995
~~ ~
Effectiveness of Fit Check Methods 935
TABLE 1. Evolution of Negative and Positive Pressure Test Traced Through Selected Documents
Reference Negative Pressure Test Positive Pressure Test
AIHA/ACGIH 1963(5)
ANSI Z88.2-1969@)
ANSI Z88.2-1980(’)
ANSI Z88.2-1992(2)
This standard carries the following
caution: “Care must be taken in
conducting negative or positive
pressure fit checks. Thorough
training in carrying out these tests
should be given to respirator
wearers. Fit checks are not
substitutes for qualitative or
quantitative fit tests.”
Close off the inlet opening of the canister by covering
it with the palm of hand or by replacing the tape seal,
inhale so that the facepiece collapses slightly, and hold
the breath for 10 seconds. If the facepiece remains in
its slightly collapsed condition and no inward leakage
of air is detected, the tightness of the gas mask, as
worn, is satisfactory.
Close off the inlet opening of the canister or
cartridge(s) by covering it with the palm of the
hand(s) or by replacing the seal(s), inhale gently so
that the facepiece collapses slightly, and hold the
breath for 10 seconds. If the facepiece remains in its
slightly collapsed condition and no inward leakage of
air is detected, the tightness of the respirator is
probably satisfactory.
Follow procedures recommended by the manufacturer
or the inlet opening of the respirator’s canister(s), or
cartridge(s), or fdter(s) is closed off by covering with
the palms of the hand(s), by replacing the inlet seal on
a canister(s), or by squeezing a breathing tube or
blocking its inlet so it will not allow the passage of
air. Then the wearer inhales and holds his or her
breath for at least 10 seconds. If a facepiece collapses
slightly and no inward leakage of air into the
facepiece is detected, it can be reasonably assumed
that the fit of the respirator to the wearer is
satisfactory. For a respirator equipped with a
mouthpiece and nose clamp, if leakage of air into the
nose or mouth cannot be detected, then it can be
reasonably assumed that the fit of the respirator to the
wearer is satisfactory.
Follow procedures recommended by the manufacturer
or the inlet opening of the respirator’s canister(s), or
cartridge(s), or filter(s) is closed off by covering with
the palms of the hand(s), by replacing the inlet seal on
a canister(s), or by squeezing a breathing tube or
blocking its inlet so it will not allow the passage of
air. Then the wearer inhales gently and holds hidher
breath. If a facepiece collapses slightly and no inward
leakage of air into the facepiece is detected, it can be
reasonably assumed that the fit of the respirator to the
wearer is satisfactory.
Close off the exhalation valve and exhale
gently so that a slight positive pressure is
built up in the facepiece. If no outward
leakage of air is detected at the periphery
of the facepiece, the face fit is
satisfactory.
Close off the exhalation valve and exhale
gently into the facepiece. The face fit is
considered satisfactory if a slight positive
pressure can be built up inside the
facepiece without any evidence of
leakage of air at the seal. For most
respirators, this method of leak testing
requires that the wearer first remove the
exhalation valve cover and then carefully
replace it after the test.
Follow procedures recommended by the
manufacturer or the exhalation valve, or
breathing tube, or both, is closed off and
then the wearer exhales gently. The fit
of a respirator equipped with a facepiece
is considered to be satisfactory if a slight
positive pressure is built up inside the
facepiece without the detection of any
outward leakage of air between the
sealing surface of the facepiece and the
respirator wearer’s face. The fit of a
respirator equipped with a mouthpiece
and nose clamp is considered satisfactory
if the respirator wearer senses a buildup
of positive pressure and is unable to
detect any outward leakage of air
through the nose and in the area
between the mouth and mouthpiece.
Follow procedures recommended by the
manufacturer or the exhalation valve, or
breathing tube, or both, is closed off and
then the wearer exhales gently. The fit
of a respirator equipped with a facepiece
is considered to be satisfactory if a slight
positive pressure is built up inside the
facepiece without the detection of any
outward leakage of air between the
sealing surface of the facepiece and the
respirator wearer’s face.
detection of outbound air exiting the face seal. These fit checks
were described in early standards and recommendations as
documented in Table 1.
Manufacturers of disposable, filtering facepiece RPE typically recommend covering the mask with both hands, exhaling, and checking for air flow between the face and the seahng
surface of the respirator.
While these fit check methods are widely recommended
and used, there is no published research that has evaluated the
efficacy of fit checks in aiding wearers to don RPE. Hardis et
did report on a study correlating results of a negative
pressure qualitative fit test against fit factors obtained by standard quantitative fit test. They reported that out of 195 passing
negative pressure qualitative fit tests, only one was found to
provide a quantitative fit factor of less than ten.
The objective of this article is to address a number of
questions and issues regarding fit checks: (1) Does performing
a fit check help users of properly fit RPE detect bad donnings?
(2) Does use of a fit check increase the probability of achieving
a certain level of fit? (3) Does use of a fit check provide more 
936 W.R. Myers et al. APPL.OCCUP. ENVIRON.HYG.
lO(11) NOVEMBER 1995
consistent donning of the RPE? (4) Is the fit check recommended for filtering facepiece respirators as effective as those
recommended for elastomeric respirators?
This article reports the results of two experiments. The first
evaluated the usefulness of the fit check to assist subjects in
correctly donning RPE by comparing the number of successful
donning achieved in two groups: one donning with the aid of
a fit check, and the other without the aid of a fit check. The
second experiment measured the discriminatory power of a fit
check by having subjects assess the fit of RPE which had been
preadjusted to cause poor fit characteristics.
Materials and Methods
Test Subiects
Subjects were recruited via questionnaire from a very large
population (> 10,000) of predominantly white-collar workers.
All subjects had to meet the following minimum requirements
to participate in the research study: 1. no direct affiliation or
business responsibility with the research, design, or manufacture of RPE; 2. no previous training in the use of RPE; 3. no
previous experience with wearing RPE in their jobs; and 4. no
facial hair that would compromise the seal of the RPE.
Potential test subjects, meeting the aforementioned criteria,
were given manufacturer's instructions for donning the RPE.
They were then fit tested using the sodium saccharin qualitative fit test method following the protocol published in the
OSHA Lead Standard 29 CFR 1910.1025.(*) This method has
been vahdated against quantitative fit test methods to be capable of rejecting masks with fit factors of less than approximately
If the subject failed the initial fit test, the respirator was
donned again and the fit test was repeated. If the subject failed
the fit test on the second donning, that respirator was not used
by that subject in the study. Subjects failing to receive adequate
fit on more than one of the four respirators were not selected
for the study.
Subjects were randomly divided into three groups. The 32
subjects assigned to group 1 were trained to don and adjust the
respirators but were not instructed on using fit checks. The 32
subjects assigned to group 2 were trained to don and adjust the
respirators with the aid of fit checks. Because of the fit test
inclusion criteria discussed in the preceding paragraphs, in
some cases there were less than 32 subjects wearing each of the
four respirators in these two groups.
The 64 subjects assigned to group 3 were trained to don and
adjust the respirators with the aid of fit checks. This group was
used in experiment I1 to measure the hscriminatory power of
a fit check by having subjects assess the fit of the RPE which
had been preadjusted to purposely cause poor fit characteristics.
Subjects selected for use in the studies received a small
compensation for their participation.
Respirators
Four negative-pressure, half-facepiece respirators were used in
the study. Each is certified in the United States by the National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH). The
assigned protection factor for half-facepiece respirators is ten.(2)
Three of the RPE were different types of disposable filtering
facepiece (DFF) respirators. The fourth type was a dual-cartridge, elastomeric facepiece (EF) respirator.
One of the three DFF respirators was a NIOSH-certified
dustlmist (DIM) class device that incorporated a moldable
nose clip. The second was a NIOSH-certified dust/fume/mist
(D/F/M) class device that had an exhalation valve and a
moldable nose clip. The third was a NIOSH-certified, high
efficiency (HE) class device that had an exhalation valve, a
moldable nose clip, and an elastomeric face seal ring. The DFF
respirators were available in only one facepiece size except for
the HE, which was available in two sizes.
The EF respirator was configured with NIOSH-certified
D/M class filter elements. This respirator was available in two
facepiece sizes.
Respirator freadjustment for Experiment I/
The moldable nosepiece on the three DFF respirators provided
an opportunity to preadjust the nosepiece to purposely induce
leaks around subject's nose. Oestenstad et aI.('O) found that the
nose is the most common leak site for subjects wearing halffacepiece respirators. In that study, which involved 73 subjects,
the nose was involved as a site of leakage approximately 78
percent of the time.
The nosepieces of the DFF respirators were preformed on
one of two different head forms. One head form had a very
wide, smooth nose bridge which left the nosepiece virtually
unchanged from its out of-the-package configuration. The
other had a much narrower nose, which resulted in the nosepiece being squeezed together during the preforming. These
two preformed nosepiece configurations, coupled with the
range of facial sizes and nose shapes represented by the study
population, presented the possibility for a wide range of fit
outcomes.
Preadjustments on the EF respirator consisted of setting the
head and neck straps 2 cm looser than where the subject had
initially adjusted the straps to pass the saccharin qualitative fit
test. Strap length had been noted during the training session.
The head cradle construction of this respirator made it possible
to preadjust strap tension for this phase of the testing while still
enabling the subjects to easily don the respirator. In addition,
each subject wore both sizes of the EF respirator, resulting in
an even greater range of fits.
laboratory Protection Factor Testing
The quality of each donning was assessed from measurements
of particle concentrations inside and outside the respirator
during a chamber test. It is important to note that since
non-high efficiency particulate air class filters were used (in
contrast to requirements to conduct fit testing), filter penetration could be a significant contributor to the in-facepiece
concentration. Therefore, the independent variable of the
chamber test is denoted as a laboratory protection factor
(LPF).(") As defined for the purposes of this study, the LPF is
the ratio of chamber particle concentration to in-facepiece
particle concentration, where the in-facepiece concentration is
a function of filter efficiency as well as face seal penetration.
Chamber testing was performed with a system that utilized
a TSI model 3450 vibrating orifice aerosol generator to produce a 2.0-pm diameter particle of corn oil. Particles were 
APPL.OCCUP. ENVIRON.HYG.
lO(11) NOVEMBER 1995
Effectiveness of Fit Check Methods 937
counted with a TSI model 33 APS unit. The equipment and
test setup have been previously described in greater detd.(I2)
In-facepiece particle counts were determined at 1-second
intervals and averaged over each exercise period, which lasted
for 0.5 minutes. The exercises used were the standard six
exercises suggested for quantitative fit testing of half-facepiece
respirators.(’)
Chamber concentration was determined by averaging the
particle counts fiom 1-minute sampling periods immediately
before and after the subject performed the six exercises.
Penetration for a particular exercise (Pj) was calculated from
the average of the 30 1-second in-facepiece particle counts
(FPC,) made during that particular exercise and the average
chamber particle counts (CPC).
FPC,
p. = ~ ’ CPC
The average test penetration was calculated as follows:
E pj
where:
i = 1 st to the nth exercise.
The overall test LPF was calculated as the inverse of the
overall test penetration.
1
Ptest LPF,,,, = - (3)
Measurements of in-facepiece particle counts were corrected for errors introduced by retention of particles in the
lung. Models for deposition of inhaled aerosols for nose and
mouth breathing were used to derive the fiaction of particles
deposited in the lung.(13) It was assumed that subjects spent
equal time nose and mouth breathing. The particle diameter of
the test aerosol was -2.0 pm, with a particle density of 0.91.
Based on breathing patterns characteristic of sedentary work
rate conditions, an average flow rate of 500 ml/s was selected
along with an average residence time of 2 second^.('^*^^)
Under these conditions, the models yield deposition fractions of -0.48 and -0.81 for mouth and nose breathing,
respectively. Averaging these values, assuming equal time is
spent nose and mouth breathing, leads to an average deposition
fraction of -0.65.
When calculating the correction factor to apply to the
overall breathing cycle, it was assumed that inhalation and
exhalation times were equal. The deposition fraction was only
applied to the exhalation portion of the breathing cycle. The
resulting correction factor was 0.675.(’@ The correction factor
was used as a constant that was applied to each test result.
Correcting in-facepiece particle count data for lung deposition
increases estimates of penetration.
The in-facepiece particle count data reflected total in-board
leakage, that is, leakage through the filter and exhalation valve
of the facepiece, as well as around the sealing surface of the
TABLE 2. Aerosol Penetration Through Filters and Valves
Mean Percent Standard Filter Eff.
Respirator Penetration N Deviation Factor*
D/M DFF 1.25 6 0.153 80
D/F/M DFF 4.50 X 8 0.0019 22,000
HE DFF 3.90 X 6 0.00021 256,000
D/M EF 5.48 X lo-” 5 0.00134 18,200
*A number invenely related to the penetration of the filter.(”)
facepiece. The magnitude of the fdter and exhalation valve
leakage on these respirators was estimated before testing began.
To evaluate fdter efficiency, specimens of each respirator
were sealed with an air-tight seal to a test form. Air was drawn
through the respirator with a breathing machine operated with
a 622 work rate cam which produced a tidal volume of 1.6 L.
The stroke fiequency was adjusted to produce a minute flow
rate of approximately 30 L. The challenge aerosol was the corn
oil aerosol used in performing the LPF testing. Table 2 shows
the results of the filter penetration studies that were performed.
The filter penetrations of the D/F/M and HE filtering
facepieces and the D/M EF were very small. On these devices
fdter penetration would not be a major source of in-board
leakage. On the D/M filtering facepiece the filter penetration
was 1.25 percent. For this device, fdter penetration could be a
significant contributor to total in-board leakage and thereby
confound evaluation of the fit check.
Experimental Protocols
EXPERIMENT I. In experiment I, which was to evaluate fit
checks as an aid to successful donning, two groups of 32
subjects with no previous experience wearing respirators were
trained to don the four respirators following the manufacturer’s
instructions.
One group was trained to use fit checks as part of the
donning process. The fit check outcome (i.e., pass or fail) was
noted. Again, the manufacturer’s instructions for conducting
the fit checks were followed. With the EF respirator the fit
check instructions were to use either a positive pressure or a
negative pressure sealing test; therefore, one-half of the 32
subjects were randomly selected and trained on one fit check
or the other.
The second group only received donning instructions (e.g.,
how to position the mask on the face, how to adjust the straps,
and how to mold the nosepiece to the nose, etc.). They
received no training or instruction in conducting or using fit
checks.
Subjects were trained over a 2-day period. Two of the four
respirators were randomly selected for each day. Testing was
conducted over the 3 days immediately following their training.
Six replicate donnings and associated LPF measurements
were made on each test subject for the respirators in which
they had been successfully fit tested. The respirator test order
was randomized. There is a subjective factor in how a person
dons a respirator and performs a fit check. This subjectivity
would tend to make the six donnings per subject not independent. For statistical analyses, sample sizes were corrected
using the Satterthwaite method.(17) This method uses the es- 
938 W.R. Myers et al. APPL.OCCUP. ENVIRON.HYG.
lO(11) NOVEMBER 1995
I
of I
ao a
FIGURE 1. Distributions of LPFs obtained on two groups of subjects
donning a D/M DFF with and without using fit checks.
timates of intersubject and intrasubject variability to determine
a modified sample size equivalent to the number of independent readings. For our data this correction reduced the sample
sizes from 23 to 65 percent.
After receiving training, no attempt was made to correct
donning errors made by the test subjects, such as crossing
straps, forgetting to tighten straps, failure to mold nosepiece,
etc., during the testing phase. In the group using fit checks,
when the subject’s assessment of the fit was solicited, no
attempt was made to correct or assist in performance of the fit
check. For this group, fit check instructions were available for
reference if a subject cared to review them.
EXPERIMENT 11. For the second experiment 64 subjects were
trained to don the four respirators with the aid of the manufacturer’s suggested fit check procedures. Subjects from experiment I could not participate in experiment 11. The training
and qualification criteria for subjects in experiment I1 were
identical to those for the group trained to use fit checks in
experiment I.
On the day following their training, subjects donned and fit
checked two preadjusted versions of each of the four respirators. The respirators were preadjusted to produce a sufficient
number of poor fits to test the ability of fit checks to identi@
poor or improper fits.
During this phase of testing, subjects were instructed to don
the respirators as they normally would, except they were not to
reform the nosepiece of the DFF respirators or readjust the
straps of the EF respirator. The fit check outcome (i.e., pass or
fd) was noted and the subject underwent the LPF testing. The
outcomes of the two tests were then compared.
Results and Discussion
LPFs from the group donning respirators without fit checks
were compared to the LPFs obtained from the group donning
with fit checks. The fit check and no fit check groups were
compared in several ways. First, log probability plots comparing the LPFs measured on each group were made for each
respirator (Figures 1 through 4).
Figure 1 is the log probability (L-P) plot of the LPFs for the
groups donning the D/M filtering facepiece with and without
the aid of fit checks. Each plotting point is the geometric mean
(GM) LPF for each subject. The L-P distributions of the LPF
values measured on subjects using and not using fit checks are
very similar between the 30th and 80th percentiles. The GM
LPF for the no fit check group was 93, while the group using
fit checks had a GM LPF of 110. No significant difference in
GM LPF was found between the two test groups.
There is evidence in Figure 1 to suggest that using fit checks
did improve the LPF values at the low end of the distribution
(below the 30th percentile). The use of the fit check had the
effect of shifting the low end tail of the LPF distribution to the
right. These observations suggest that conducting the fit check
had some value in helping to improve or eliminate poorerquality donnings. The variability in LPF measurements was not
found to be significantly lower in the test group donning with
the aid of fit checks (Table 3).
Figure 2 shows the L-P plot of the LPFs for the D/F/M
filtering facepiece. The distribution LPF values obtained on
the test group donning with fit checks fell to the right of the
group not using fit checks, that is, the group using fit checks
achieved higher LPFs. The GM LPF for the no fit check group
was 140, while the group using fit checks had a GM LPF of
291.
In this case the distributions were significantly different. The
use of a fit check as an aid to donning this type of respirator
significantly improved its overall performance in the chamber
test. The variability of the two distributions was not significantly different (Table 3).
A possible explanation for the fit check causing an overall
increase in the LPF distribution without changing the shape of
the distribution is that performance of the fit check caused
subjects to take added care during donning. The added care
resulted from doing the fit check and led to better donnings,
causing a shift of the entire LPF distribution and not just of the
lower tail.
Figure 3 shows the L-P plot of the LPFs for the HE filtering
facepiece. The GM LPF for the no fit check group was 758,
while the group using fit checks had a GM LPF of 1633. In this
case the distributions were not found to be significantly different.
The distribution of LPFs achieved with the group using fit
checks was shifted toward higher LPFs in the lower tail region.
TABLE 3. Pooled Standard Deviations of LPFs for Groups
of Test Subjects Donning Respirators With and Without Perfarming
a Fit Check Procedure
Respirator No Fit Check Fit Check
D/M DFF
D/F/M DFF
HE DFF*
D/M EF
~
0.229
0.322
0.657
0.413
0.211
0.295
0.519
0.465
*A significant difference in variances exists between the fit check and no fit
check groups. 
APPL.OCCUP. ENVIRON.HYG. Effectiveness of Fit Check Methods 939
lO(11) NOVEMBER 1995
Laboratory Protection Factor
FIGURE 2. Distributions of LPFs obtained on two groups of subjects
donning a D/F/M DFF with and without using fit checks.
This shift resulted in a significantly lower variability than with
the no fit test group (Table 3). With the HE respirator,
conducting a fit check had the effect of improving the quality
of respirator donnings, thereby eliminating the lower LPFs.
The shift in the lower tail of the LPF distributions for the
D/M and HE DFF respirators implies that performance of the
fit check did not tend to improve the fitting characteristics of
those respirators beyond removing poorer fits. For the D/F/M
DFF respirator, performance of fit checks resulted in a significant average improvement in LPFs, not just in the lower tail
of the distribution.
Figure 4 shows the L-P plot of the LPFs for the D/M
0.1
0.01
I I I
1 10 QOO 1
Lahratory Protedon Factor
FIGURE 3. Distributions of LPFs obtained on two groups of subjects
donning a high efficiency DFF with and without using fit checks.
FIGURE 4. Distributions of LPFs obtained on two groups of subjects
donning a D/M EF with and without using fit checks.
elastomeric facepiece. The GM LPF for the no fit check group
was 608, while the group using fit checks had a very similar
GM LPF of 580. The dstribution of LPF values for the two
groups is very sirmlar, indicating that no improvement in the
quahty of donnings was achieved by doing fit checks.
A possible explanation for this observation is the small
number of lower LPF values: only 5 percent of each population, or two subjects, had LPFs around 100 or less. The small
number of donnings actually resulting in LPF values below 100
reduces the opportunity to observe the value of a fit check
(i.e., to remove the lower LPFs). This could also explain why
the characteristic shift in the tail region toward higher fit
factors for the group using fit checks is not seen with this
respirator, but was observed with the D/M and HE DFF
respirators.
An alternative explanation for this observation is that performance of fit checks was not effective at detecting poorer
donnings. However, this explanation is questioned by the
results from experiment 11, which found that performing fit
checks on the EF respirator resulted in the best estimate of
sensitivity for detecting poor fits.
The effect of performing the fit check on the proportion of
subjects achieving LPFs greater than ten was also examined.
The value of ten represents the assigned protection factor for
half-facepiece respirators.('.2) The LPF data collected in these
studles were not always lognormally distributed (see Figures 1
through 4). As a result, binomial statistical methods were used
to analyze the data collected from this phase.
The observed and corrected (Satterthwaite's correction) values of the number of donnings where resulting LPFs were less
than ten are listed in Table 4. Only the corrected values were
used in subsequent analysis. A binomial approximation to the
hypergeometric distribution was used to compare the proportions of donnings resulting in LPFs of less than ten for the test
groups donning with versus without fit checks.('8) 
940 W.R. Myers et al. APPL.0CCLJE'. ENVIRON.HYG.
lO(11) NOVEMBER 1995
TABLE 4. Proportion of Donnings Resulting in LPFs of Less Than Ten
No Fit Check Group Observed Values Fit Check Group Observed Values
Respirator Uncorrected CorrectedA % < 10 Uncorrected Corrected" Yo < 10
D/M DFF 5/152 2.34/71 3.3A 01132 0/87 0.OA
D/F/M DFF 3/171 1.49/85 1.8* 01168 0/58 0.OA
HE DFF 11/150 5.79/79 7.3B 2/192 1.54/148 1 .oc
D/M EF 0/186 0/113 O.OA 3/186 1.68/104 1 .6A
Average 9.62/348 2.76B 3.22/397 0.81C
Asample size reduced via Satterthwaite statistical method.(")
B.cPercentages of donnings resulting in LPFs of less than ten between the fit check and no fit check groups with mfferent superscripts were significantly different.
For the HE filtering facepiece, the proportion of donning
resulting in LPFs of less than ten was significantly lower for the
test group donning with fit checks as compared to the test
group donning without fit checks. No difference was found
with the other three respirators. However, the data in Table 4
do suggest that the performance offit checks tends to lower the
proportion of donning, resulting in LPFs of less than ten for
the D/M and D/F/M filtering facepieces.
The method of performing the fit check with the three
filtering facepiece respirators differs slightly from the fit check
method for the elastomeric respirator (i.e., the subject is checking for air flow around the face seal in the former case and for
buildup and maintenance of positive or negative pressure in
the latter case). A binomial approximation to the hypergeometric distribution was used again, ths time to compare the
proportions of donnings resulting in LPFs of less than ten for
the elastomeric facepiece and the filtering facepieces.
For subjects donning with fit checks, there were no significant dlfferences between the proportion of donning resulting
in LPFs of less than ten for the elastomeric facepiece or any of
the filtering facepieces (see Table 4).
The effect of the fit check on the variability of LPFs
achieved with multiple donnings was also examined for each
respirator. The pooled standard deviations for subjects using fit
checks compared with the pooled standard deviations for subjects not using fit checks are given in Table 3. The variability
in LPF measurements was found to be significantly lower for
subjects using fit checks with the HE filtering facepiece. No
significant differences were seen in the variability of LPF
measurements for the other respirators. However, a slight
reduction in pooled standard deviations for subjects using fit
checks was observed with the D/M and D/F/M filtering
facepieces.
Experiment I1 was conducted to measure the dlscriminatory
power of fit checks to dlfferentiate between acceptable donning (i.e., those donning resulting in LPFs of ten or better)
and unacceptable donning (i.e., those donning resulting in
LPFs of less than ten). The discriminatory power of a test is
determined by its specificity and sensitivity. Specificity is the
ability of the test to accurately identify a correctly donned
respirator. Sensitivity is the ability of the test to accurately
identify an incorrectly donned respirator.
Of these two parameters, the sensitivity of the test is most
important. In this case, sensitivity relates to the chance of a
worker unknowingly wearing a respirator that is not properly
donned into a hazardous environment. The specificity is not as
critical since the consequence of this error is most likely that
the worker will readjust a respirator that is already donned
correctly. Perhaps in the process the quality of the donning will
be improved.
Sensitivity of the fit check was calculated by taking the
number of donning resulting in LPFs of less than ten where
the subject said the respirator failed the fit check and dividing
by the total number of donning that actually resulted in LPFs
of less than ten. For a test to have perfect sensitivity, this value
would be 100 percent. Table 5 gives the sensitivity and the 95
percent confidence intervals determined for each respirator.
The values were corrected for sample size via the Satterthwaite
formula.
The sensitivity of the elastomeric facepiece fit check procedure was not significantly different than the sensitivity of the fit
check procedure used for the filtering facepieces.
Specificity was calculated by dwidmg the number of donning resulting in LPFs of ten or higher, where the subjects said
they passed the fit check, by the total number of donning
resulting in LPFs of ten or higher. For a test with perfect
specificity, this value would be 100 percent. Table 6 shows the
specificity determination made on each respirator corrected for
sample size via the Satterthwaite formula, and the 95 percent
confidence interval for each value. A contingency table analysis
of the specificity values found that fit checks done on the
D/F/M DFF respirator resulted in significantly better specificity than with the other respirators. There is no obvious
explanation for this finding.
TABLE 5. Sensitivity Estimates Determined for Fit Checks Conducted on
Four Types of Half Facepieces
95% Confidence
Respirator Best EstimateA Intervals
D/M DFF 24.3/27
(90%)
D/F/M DFF 3.2/4
HE DFF 23/23
D/M EFB 31/31
(80%)
(100%)
(100%)
73.4-97.5%
45.0-96.2%
85.0-100%
89.0-100%
Sensitivity is calculated by dung those donnings resulting in LPFs of less than
10 that were identified by the test subject as a fit check failure, divided by all
the donnings resulting in LPFs of less than 10.
AThe observed values re orted here have been corrected for sample size via the
Satterthwaite formula.(lg
%ensitivity value determined for the EF was not significantly difference than
the sensitivities observed on the DFFs. 
APPL.OCCUP. ENVIRON.HY G.
lO(11) NOVEMBER 1995
Effectiveness of Fit Check Methods 941
TABLE 6. Specificity Estimates Determined for Fit Checks Conducted on
Four Types of Half Facepieces
95% Confidence
Respirator Best EstimateA Intervals
D/M DFF 35.4/64 43-68%
D/F/M DFF 75.9/88 77-93%
(86%)B
HE DFF 39.4/69 45-70%
(55%)
(57%)
(57%)
D/M EF 36.8/64 45-70%
Specificity is calculated by taking the number of donning with fit factors of
ten or greater that were fit check passes and dividing by the total number of
donnings with fit factors of ten or greater.
*The observed values re orted here have been corrected for sample size via the
Satterthwaite formula.(lfl
BA contingency table analysis found that the specificity for this respirator is
significantly better than the specificity of the other respirators.
Conclusions
The LPF results obtained from these studies found that employing a manufacturer’s recommended fit check when donning a respirator helped detect and prevent poorer-quality
donnings of the respirator. As the quality of donnings increases,
the usefulness of fit checks as a tool to evaluate the donningwith the goal of further improvement-becomes less. The
better the facepiece seals to the face, the more difficult it is for
the wearer to differentiate whether subtle changes in pressure
or air flow have occurred.
Results observed on the D/M DFF respirator suggest that
when fit checks are used for donning respirators which have
considerable filter penetration, the resulting improvement in
the quality of a donning may be considerably less important in
determining the net performance. A fit check helps evaluate
the integrity of the face seal. As filter leakage becomes a more
significant component of total in-board leakage, the relevance
of conducting a fit check decreases.
Donning respirators with fit checks did decrease the likelihood fiom 2.8 to 0.81 percent of those donnings resulting in
LPF values of less than ten. However, the decrease was only
statistically significant with the HE DFF respirator.
Performing a fit check was found to produce a general
reduction in the variability of the LPFs measured on the three
DFF respirators. The reduction was significant for one of the
three.
The general trend toward fewer unsuccessfbl donnings and
more consistent donning when fit checks were used implies
that fit checks have value in assisting the wearer to properly
don a respirator.
Fit check methods applied to the DFF respirators were
found to be equivalent to the fit check methods applied to the
EF respirator by all criteria used in the study to assess fit checks.
The sensitivity of the fit check to detect bad donnings of
previously fit tested respirators averaged 96 percent for all four
respirators. Conversely, the percentage of subjects accurately
identifying properly donned respirators with the fit check
averaged 66 percent for all four respirators. Considering that fit
check methods are very simple to perform and require no
ancillary equipment, the sensitivity and specificity for these
methods are remarkably good.
Inexperienced workers can be trained in performing successful fit checks on elastomeric and disposable filtering facepiece RPE. It is expected that with additional experience
respirator users might develop better and more consistent fit
check skills, thereby further improving the quality of respirator
donning. Therefore, we conclude that for wearers of respirators that have been properly fit by a recognized fit test,
conducting fit checks according to the manufacturer’s instructions can be a useful tool for more consistently maintaining the
quality of respirator donning.
Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge Stuart J. Janis, IS&DP Statistical
Consulting, 3M, St. Paul, Minnesota, and Kenneth L. Simpson, Carol R. Rhoe, David L. Dimartino, Jeanne 0. Bidwell,
Haskell E. Mukns, and Craig Colton, Occupational Health
and Environmental Safety Division, 3M, St. Paul, Minnesota.
References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
American National Standards Institute: American National Standard for Respirator Protection. ANSI 288.2-1980. American
National Standards Institute, Inc., New York (1980).
American National Standards Institute: American National Standard for Respirator Protection. ANSI 288.2-1992. American
National Standards Institute, Inc., New York (1992).
Pritchard, J.A.: A Guide to Industrial Respiratory Protection.
DHHS(NI0SH) Pub. No. 76-189. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Cincinnati, OH (1976).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 29, Part 1910, Subpart 134.
U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC (as amended
Nov. 12, 1982).
American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists:
Respiratory Protective Devices Manual. ACGIH, Cincinnati,
OH (1963).
American National Standards Institute: American National Standard for Respirator Protection. ANSI 288.2-1969. American
National Standards Institute, Inc., New York (1969).
Hardis, K.E.; Cadena, C.A.; Carlson, G.J.; et al.: Correlation of
Qualitative and Quantitative Results from Testing Respirator
Fit. Am. Ind. Hyg. Assoc. J. 44(2):78-87 (1983).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 29, Part 1910, Subpart Z,
Section 1025-Appendix D, 190-194. Lead Standard. U.S.
Government Printing Office, Washington, DC (7-1-91 Edition).
Marsh, J.L.: Evaluation of Saccharin Qualitative Fitting Test for
Respirators. Am. Ind. Hyg. Assoc. J. 45(6):371-376 (1984).
Oestenstad, R.K.; Dillion, H.K.; Perkins, L.L.: Distribution of
Faceseal Leak Sites on a Half-Mask Respirator and Their Association with Facial Dimensions. Am. Ind. Hyg. Assoc. J. 51(5):
Guy, H.P.: Respiratory Protection Committee, Respirator Performance Terminology. Am. Ind. Hyg. Assoc. J. 46(5):B-22
(1985).
Iverson, S.G.; Danisch, S.G.; Mullins, H.E.; et al.: Validation of
a Quantitative Fit Test for Dust/Fume/Mist Respirators: Part I.
Appl. Occup. Environ. Hyg. 7(3):161-167 (1992).
Yu, C.; Diu, C.: Total and Regional Deposition of Inhaled
Aerosols in Humans. Journal of Aerosol Science 14:599-609
(1983).
Parkes, W.: Inhaled Particles and Their Fate in the Lungs. In:
285-290 (1990). 
942 W.R. Myers et d. APPL.0CCUP. ENVIRON.HYG.
lO(11) NOVEMBER 1995
Occupational Lung Disorders. Buttenvorths, London, UK Test for Dust/Mist Respirators: Part 11. Appl. Occup. Environ.
17. Snedecor, G.W.; Cochran, W.G.: Statistical Methods. Iowa State
University Press, Ames, IA (1980).
18. Hiltner, L.F.: When Is Different Not? Lengthy Calculations May
Be Avoided. Quality Journal April:24-25 (1977).
(1982). Hyg. 7(4):241-245 (1992).
15. Lippman, M.; Yeates, D.; Albert, R.: Deposition, Retention, and
Clearance of Inhaled Particles. British Journal of Industrial Medicine 37:337-362 (1980).
16. Danisch, S.G.; Mullins, H.E.; Rhoe, C.R.: A Quantitative Fit 