ORIGINAL ARTICLE
A KANDOMIZED FIELD
TKIAL OF ACINDES:
A CHILD-CENTEKED TKAINING
MODEL FOK CHILDKEN WITH
CHKONIC ILLNESSES
(ASTHMA AND EPILEPSY)
J. A. TIEFFENBERG, MD, MPH, MS, E. I. WOOD, MD, RN,
A. ALONSO, STAT., M. S. TOSSUTTI, TEACHER,
AND M. F. VICENTE, TEACHER
ABSTRACT A randomized field trial of a child-centered model of training for selfmanagement of chronic illnesses was conducted of 355 Spanish-speaking school-aged
children, between 6 and 15 years old, with moderate to severe asthma and epilepsy, in
Buenos Aires, Argentina. The model, based on play techniques, consists of five weekly
meetings of 8-10 families, with children's and parents' groups held simultaneously, coordinated by specially trained teachers and outside the hospital environment. Children are
trained to assume a leading role in the management of their health; parents learn to be
facilitators; and physicians provide guidance, acting as counselors. Group activities include
games, drawings, stories, videos, and role-playing. Children and parents were interviewed
at home before the program and 6 and 12 months after the program, and medical and
school records were monitored for emergency and routine visits, hospitalizations, and
school absenteeism. In asthma and epilepsy, children in the experiment showed significant
improvements in knowledge, beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors compared to controls (probability of experimental gain over controls = .69 for epilepsy and .56 for asthma, with o ~ =
.007 and .016, respectively). Parent participants in the experiment had improved knowledge
of asthma (39% before vs. 58% after) and epilepsy (22% before vs. 56% after), with a
probability of gain = .62 (o ~ = .0026) with respect to the control group. Similar positive
outcomes were found in fears of child death (experimental 39% before vs. 4% after for
asthma, 69% before vs. 30% after for epilepsy), as well as in disruption of family life
and patient-physician relationship, while controls showed no change. Regarding clinical
variables, for both asthma and epilepsy, children in the experimental group had significantly fewer crises than the controls after the groups (P = .036 and P = .026). Visits to
The authors are from the Research Division, Self-Help Training Project of ACINDES,
Association for Health Research and Development, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Reprints: J. A. Tieffenberg, ACINDES. (E-mail: info@acindes.com.ar), Mariano Palliza
767, Olivos, Provincia de Buenos Aires, Argentina, CP 1636.
JOURNAL OF URBAN HEALTH: BULLETIN OF THE NEW YORK ACADEMY OF MEDICINE
VOLUME 77, NUMBER 2, JUNE 2000 280 ~) 2000 THE NEW YORK ACADEMY OF MEDICINE 
A RANDOMIZED FIELD TRIAL OF ACINDES 281
physicians showed a significant decrease for those with asthma (P = .048), and emergency
visits decreased for those with epilepsy (P = .046).
An 18-item Children Health Locus of Control Scale (CHLCS) showed a significant
increase in internality in experimental group children with asthma and epilepsy (P < .01),
while controls did not change or performed worse 12 months after the program. School
absenteeism was reduced significantly for those with asthma and epilepsy (for the group
with asthma, fall/winter P = .006, and spring P = .029; for the group with epilepsy, P = .011).
Conclusion. The program was successful in improving the health, activity, and quality of
life of children with asthma and epilepsy. The data suggested that an autonomous (Piagetian) model of training is a key to this success, reinforcing children's autonomous decision
making.
KEY WORDS; Asthma, Children, Chronic illnesses, Diabetes, Self-help, Training.
Chronic physical conditions (such as asthma, epilepsy, and diabetes) have increasing importance in health care. 1-3 In the US, for example, the three conditions
together affect at least 3,747,000 children and adolescents under 18 years old
(85% with asthma, 10.9% with epilepsy, and 4.1% with diabetes). 4 Asthma is
considered the principal cause of school absenteeism due to chronic physical
conditions, and all three are the cause of a large number of emergency visits, 5
with negative effects on family dynamics and children's well-being, 6 which is
of concern especially when the current medical treatment possibilities are so
promising. 7's
For asthma, the growing concern about the increase in morbidity and mortality, 9'1~ despite the availability of promising therapeutic tools, spawned the development of several educational and self-help programs, n-~6 However, for other
chronic problems such as epilepsy, the efforts aimed at improving outcome
through self-management and child autonomy are only just beginning. 17
Most programs developed to date are "disease specific." Interest has been
mounting in studies directed toward chronic illness as a whole. 17 However, most
programs are located in medical centers. We do not know of any training program
with a common methodology for chronic conditions. In an attempt to fill this
need, we developed a self-management training model for Spanish-speaking
children 6 to 15 years old with asthma and epilepsy.
THEORETICAL RATIONALE
The program is based on the hypothesis that, by learning about the alternatives
from which they can choose, children acquire tools to build an autonomous
model of behavior that is in agreement with their health-expected values. This
requires placing the children in the center and recognizing their leading role in
the management of their own health. 
282 TIEFFENBERG ET AL.
This hypothesis is complemented by the notion that this child-centered training
is reinforced if parents also learn to recognize and accept their children's autonomy, becoming "facilitators" rather than managers. In this model, the physician
plays a consultant role, offering alternatives and specific therapeutic guidance.
The work of Piaget and others leads to the conclusion that "knowledge is
actively constructed by the individual," in contrast to the conception that knowledge simply is transmitted culturally. ~8
For our research, most important was the recognition that children's responses
to illness are not only emotional, but also cognitive. 19
The second main idea of Piaget's work is that the process central to the
construction of knowledge is self-regulation9
Piaget describes two types of adult-child relationship" (1) heteronomous (regulation by others) and (2) autonomous (cooperative). In the heteronomous relationship, the adult unilaterally prescribes what the child must do. The reason to
follow these rules is therefore external to the child's own reasoning. Piaget warned
that this coercion socializes only the surface of behavior and actually reinforces
the child's tendency to rely on purely external regulation. In terms of affective
development, coercion can produce feelings of inferiority, low motivation, and
lack of confidence. In addition, it generates three responses: (1) resistance, (2)
mindless conformity, and (3) calculation (follow rules only under adult surveillance). In chronic illnesses, this leads to known problems of poor adherence and
patient-physician dependency. The autonomous relationship is characterized
by mutual respect and cooperation and promotes the child's autonomy (selfregulation).
The results of other learning theories applied to health 2~2 are consistent with
Piaget's observations. Social learning theory, for example, explains that negative
experiences over which there is little control lead to the development of high
beliefs in external control (chance, powerful others) and low beliefs in internal
control. 23 As pointed out by Bandura, those who believe they cannot exercise
any control over their health outcomes "see little point in even trying. "24
One would expect that, after a successful program, participants would change
their beliefs and attitudes about their ability to look after themselves, and that
this would lead to significant changes in prevention behaviors. This would
translate into mensurable and stable changes in functional and clinical variables,
with considerable benefit for the well-being and functioning of the children, their
families, and those who look after them.
To corroborate this hypothesis, we assessed, in psychometric as well as clinical
and functional variables, the impact of this model of child-centered group train- 
A RANDOMIZED FIELD TRIAL OF ACINDES 283
ing. For this purpose, we developed a randomized field trial for children with
asthma and epilepsy.
METHODS
PROGRAM MODEL
The model is based on the idea of children's autonomy: They are trained to
assume a leading role in the management of their own health. The child is in
the center; parents learn to be facilitators, and physicians provide guidance,
acting as counselors. Other children in the group provide the necessary peer
support. Teachers (not doctors) coordinate the group activities. This training
model is designed to be applied in institutions such as schools or community
centers, which are more appropriate for learning than hospitals or clinics.
Structure. The program consists of five weekly 2-hour meetings for each group,
followed by a reinforcement meeting 2 to 6 months later. In these meetings,
children and parents (1) learn about the child's condition (asthma, epilepsy) and
identify body signals and early warning signs; (2) recognize the elements of
equilibrium (maintaining balance, avoiding imbalance) and identify their own
triggers; (3) understand treatment, therapeutic alternatives, and the usefulness of
a direct patient-physician relationship; (4) handle specific risk situations (identify
risks and learn strategies to handle them, including emergency home treatments;
and (5) develop appropriate decision-making strategies based on the child's own
expected values.
It is expected that, by the end of the program, the children will acquire selfmanagement skills and achieve self-reliance and appropriate preventive strategies, thereby improving their social functioning and quality of life.
The children in the experimental groups were organized according to age
bracket (6-8, 9-12, 13-15 years), with a maximum of 10 children per teacher and
a maximum of three simultaneous meetings. The majority of the groups included
children between 7 and 12 years of age. Parents were placed together in one
group, which was coordinated by one or two teachers. Children and parents in
the control group were given the same evaluations as those in the experimental
group, but received only routine care without additional training.
Group activities of the model include games, drawings, stories, videos, and
role playing. They are designed to develop
1. Observation, discrimination, and communication skills 25
2. Autonomous decision-making skills, with the children working through 
284 TIEFFENBERG ET AL.
decision trees and conditional probabilities of events to learn to assess
which road is best to reach their expected health management goal
3. An appropriate, simplified communication code based on the colors of
traffic lights, modified from Lewis et al., 26 to relate body signals, triggers,
treatments, decisions, and health states
Parents work with similar concepts, but with the goal of learning to trust
their children; the parents develop the necessary tools to become facilitators,
instead of managers.
A teacher's coordination manual was developed with general and specific
objectives for each session. Games and activities are planned specifically to cover
the concepts designed to reach each session goal.
Coordinators. The groups were coordinated by specially trained teachers. These
teachers need to meet certain requirements: On one hand, they have to know how
to promote children's self-regulation or autonomy (something well developed by
the Piagetian constructivist school, for example). 27 On the other hand, they are
trained in certain specific aspects of chronic conditions (asthma, epilepsy) and
their clinical management. Selection is made after a 2-week course aimed at playtrained, constructivist teachers. Once selected, they receive a 6-month course of
"on-the-job training" that includes courses and lectures. The group meetings are
supervised by program physicians; the child's physician participates by being
especially invited to the treatment session, at which he or she meets separately
with children and parents and answers their questions.
EVALUATION
The field trial was performed in collaboration with several health facilities in
Buenos Aires City and its outskirts (Neurology, Pulmonary, Allergy, and Immunology Outpatient Clinics of the Children's Hospital Ricardo Guti6rrez; the Neurology Clinic at the Pedro de Elizalde Children's Hospital; and the Pediatric
Neurology and Asthma Clinics of the Hospital Nacional Gervasio Posadas).
Medical records of 892 children, aged 6 to 15 years, with asthma (60%) and
epilepsy (40%) were reviewed.
Those patients meeting the inclusion criteria were interviewed at home and,
after signing an informed consent form, were assigned randomly using clustering
techniques to experimental or control status. 28-3~
For each condition, the sample was stratified by age, sex, number of attacks,
number of hospitalizations, medications used, socioeconomic level, and mother's
perception of severity. 
A RANDOMIZED FIELD TRIAL OF ACINDES 285
I NCLUSION CRITERIA
The following inclusion criteria were used: For asthma (defined according to the
AAP Committee on Allergy and Immunology Guidelines), 31~2 only children
whose condition was considered moderate or severe were included (those requiring medication the whole year, one or more times per month, or permanently).
For the epilepsy group, children with normal IQ scores 33 (from a test adapted
by Dr. Pages Larraya, published in 1996, for Argentine children) and no developmental delays were admitted if they had any kind of epilepsy that required
permanent medication and their condition had been confirmed by electroencephalogram diagnosis at least 5 months before inclusion in the group.
RANDOMIZED TRIAL
Home surveys were administered by lay workers. Once the random assignments
were made, families in the experimental groups were invited to participate in
the program and received home interview follow-ups 6 and 12 months after
the groups finished. Those assigned to the control group were home surveyed
simultaneously. Home surveys included Health Locus of Control Scales (HLCSs)
of both adults and children (CHLCs) and a sociocultural questionnaire; in addition, the school absenteeism during the years prior to and after the program was
recorded. The number of crises, routine and emergency visits, and hospitalizations were registered from medical records 6 months prior to and up to 1 year
after the program.
PROCESS MEASURES
Health Locus of Control Scale. We revised and translated the scale of Parcel and
Meyer, 34 and its validity and reliability were established in a sample of 264
primary school students (between 7 and 12 years of age). 3s Internal consistency
was very high, with a Kuder-Richardson formula-20 coefficient of .82. To test
the construct validity, we used cluster analysis. Two clusters were obtained
(internal and external), each with two subscales clearly delineated ("chance or
fate" and "powerful others" in the external cluster and "I can" and "I know" in
the internal). This corresponds with the literature. 36 To compare the locus of
control in children with epilepsy and asthma with that of children in the general
population, the Duncan test of multiple comparisons was used. 37 Statistical differences were assessed with the Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test across treatment
conditions. 38
Sociocultural survey. Children and parents were interviewed at home before the
groups were formed and 6 and 12 months after formation using a questionnaire 
286 TIEFFENBERG ET AL,
that covers five areas: (1) knowledge and beliefs concerning own illness, (2)
family dynamics, (3) patient-physician relationship, (4) treatment knowledge,
and (5) child independence and self-management.
PROBAB'L~TY O~ GA,.
The probability of gain technique, developed by Colditz et al., 39 is a powerful
measure of performance. It is an estimate of the probability that a randomly
selected subject from the experimental group would perform better after the
program than a randomly selected control subject. Statistical significance was
assessed with the Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test. Differences were significant at
P < .05.
VARIABLES
School absenteeism. School absenteeism is a good functional measure. 4~ We used
it to define the net effectiveness of the program, measured in terms of "healthy
days" per child over a period of 100 school days.
Clinical variables. The clinical variables monitored by the program have already
been described (number of crises, routine and emergency visits, hospitalizations).
The results are expressed as number of episodes (events) per child throughout
the observation period. 3~
Statistical significance was tested with the Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test.
RESULTS
Table I shows the study population. Based on the inclusion criteria described,
388 children were registered. Just 8.5% refused to participate. A total of 355
children (188 with asthma, 167 with epilepsy) were randomly placed in experimental or control groups. Of the 230 in the experimental groups, 74 did not
attend. Of these, 5% said the reason they declined to participate was lack of
interest, 50% gave reasons related to their dissatisfaction with the medical care
of the referring physician or department, and 45% referred to private problems
as the cause. We considered it important to test if the families that did not
participate were different from those that participate in regard to the variables
tested in the randomization. This may have implications for program generalizability. There were no statistical differences between these families (P < .05).
Overall, 56 families were lost to follow-up, most of them (37) from the control
group.
Several variables were statistically controlled with the Student t test (age, sex,
socioeconomic level, number of crises/seizures, number of hospitalizations, type 
A RANDOMIZED FIELD TRIAL OF ACINDES 287
TABLE I Study Population
Asthma Epilepsy Total
Registered (100%) 207 (100%) 181 (100%) 388
Refused (9.2%) 19 (7.7%) 14 (8.5%) 33
Randomized (90.8%) 188 (92.3%) 167 (85.1%) 355
Experimental Control Experimental Control Experimental Control
(100%) 127 (100%) 61 (100%) 103 (100%) 64 (100%) 230 (100%) 125
Invited,
not coming (34.6%) 44 -- (29.1%) 30 -- (32.2%) 74 --
Dropouts (11.1%) 14 -- (4.9%) 5 -- (8.3%) 19 --
Lost to
follow-up (3.9%) 5 (29.5%) 18 (13.6%) 14 (29.7%) 19 (8.3%) 19 (29.6%) 37
Completed
follow-up (50.4%) 64 (70.5%) 43 (52.4%) 54 (70.3%) 45 (51.3%) 118 (70.4%) 88
of medication, and mother's perception of severity). Before the groups, children
in the experimental and control groups did not show statistical differences in
these variables (P > .05).
PROCESS MEASURES
Changes in the Children Health Locus of Control. Before randomization, children
with asthma and epilepsy had more external scores on the locus of control than
scores obtained from a sample of the general population of children from a public
school.
Experimental versus control group. Over the course of the training program, experimental group children became more internal in general. Six months after the
program, children in both experimental groups had higher internality scores
than the control groups, but this difference was not significant statistically. However, 12 months after the program, experimental group children were significantly
more internal than comparable control children (P < .01).
While children with epilepsy were more external than all groups before the
program, HLCS scores of the experimental group children after 12 months were
indistinguishable from the general population.
LONG-TERM EFFECTS ON THE Locus OF CONTROL
A multiple regression model testing the change in internality scores from before
the program to 1 year after it, controlling for age, showed significant effects for
both experimental conditions (P < .004) and type of chronic condition (asthma
or epilepsy; P < .0001) (Table II). 
288 TIEFFENBERG ET AL.
TABLE II Hierarchical Multiple Regression Analysis Relating Change in Internality
over 12 Months to Treatment Condition and Chronic Condition, Controlling for
Age, with the Outcome Variable the Change in HLCS Scores l Year After
the Program
Standardized
Variable beta t P R 2
Step 1: control variable
Age* .21 2.16 <.04 .05
Step 2: predictor variables
Treatment conditionf (experimental or control) -.27 -2.99 <.004
Chronic condition type:~ (asthma or epilepsy) -.35 -3.9 <.0001 .22
Note: F (3.96) = 12.04, P < .001; total model R 2 --- .27.
*Age positively correlates to internality.
tExperimental group children show more change in internality than control children over and above
age effects.
:~Children with asthma show more change than children with epilepsy over and above age effects.
KNOWLEDGIE~ BI[LIIEF'S~ ATTITUI)s AND BEHAVIORS
The answers to the home survey of parents of children in the experimental groups
showed significant changes after they participated in the groups. Their knowledge
and fears of their child's death are shown in Fig. 1. Parents' knowledge improved
in the asthma group (39% before vs. 58% after) and epilepsy group (22% before
FIGURe 1 Sociocultural survey of parents (proportion of subjects). 
A RANDOMIZED FIELD TRIAL OF ACINDES 289
vs. 56% after), while controls performed worse (probability of gain: P[E > C] =
.62; o "2 = .0026).
In the area of fears and anxieties, beliefs of parents of children in the experimental groups showed significant improvement. For example, regarding fear of their
child's death (decrease from 39% to 4% for the group with asthma and from 69%
to 30% for the group with epilepsy), while controls showed no change (P [E >
C] = .65 asthma and .63 epilepsy with o'2 = .0026).
Surveys of the children showed similar trends (P [E > C] = .69 epilepsy and
.56 asthma with 0 .2 = .007 and o -2 = .016, respectively).
Most parents did not feel that either asthma or epilepsy was disruptive of
family life, that their child had fewer possibilities than other children, or that he
or she was limited in daily life activities. However, those who felt otherwise
changed significantly after participating in the groups, while controls did not,
especially for asthma (P[E > C] -- .60 and .63; o .2 = .0026). After participating in
the groups, the parents of children with epilepsy allowed them to sleep at friends'
homes more often (P [E > C] = .59; 0 .2 = .0026).
Communication between physicians and children with asthma showed
marked improvement after participation in the groups (P [E > C] = .73), as well
as in children's confidence in self-care skills (children self-administered the medio
cine: (P [E > C] = .65; o .2 -- .0258).
CLINICAL OUTCOMES
Table III summarizes the results. For both asthma and epilepsy, experimental
group children had significantly fewer crises (asthma attacks or seizures) after
TARLs III Clinical Outcomes: Number of Crises,* Routine Medical Visits, and
Emergency Visits per 12 Months. Shown by Mean Number of Observations
per Child (SD) and Significance Level
Before Group After Group
Experimental Control Experimental Control Pt
Asthma (nE = 65, nC = 52)
Regular visits
Emergency visits
Crises*
Epilepsy (nE = 50, nC = 35)
Regular visits
Emergency visits
Crises*
3.29 (3.90) 2.92 (1.85) 1.65 (2.17) 2.14 (2.04)
.43 (0.80) .75 (1.18) 0.37 (0.30) .70 (.90)
2.02 (2.84) 2.37 (3.07) 1.09 (2.21) 2.19 (2.04)
3.64 (3.01) 3.89 (4.47) 3.06 (2.57) 2.91 (3.19)
.90 (0.95) .83 (0.95) .22 (0.58) .46 (0.66)
.80 (1.46) .49 (1.15) .34 (0.98) 1.11 (2.77)
.048
ns
.036
ns
.046
.026
*Crises: asthma attacks or seizures.
tSignificant at P < .05 by Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test. 
290 TIEFFENBERG ET AL.
FIGURE 2 School absenteeism: mean number of absences per 100 school days. *REF.
POPUL.: Sample of 345 children in a public school in Buenos Aires, Argentina.
participating in the groups than the controls (P = .036 and P = .026, respectively).
Visits to physicians decreased significantly for children with asthma, as did
emergency visits for children with epilepsy (P = .048 and P = .046, respectively).
Hospital admissions decreased, but for both groups, the number of admissions
was too few to be evaluated.
SCHOOL ABSENTEEISM
Absenteeism rates are shown in Fig. 2.
Before participating in the groups, the children from the general population
and those with asthma and epilepsy did not show significant differences regarding their school absenteeism.
For children with asthma, seasonal variation is an important factor affecting
school absenteeism. Therefore, we studied the differences observed according to
season (March-July = fall/winter; August-November = spring) I year before and
1 year after formation of the groups. After the program, the experimental group
children with asthma, as well as those with epilepsy, improved significantly in
their school attendance, while controls did not (asthma fall/winter P = .006 and
spring P = .029; epilepsy P = .011). To compare absenteeism rates, school absenteeism in a sample of 345 children without chronic illness from a public school in
Buenos Aires City was recorded. After participating in the groups, experimental 
A RANDOMIZED FIELD TRIAL OF ACINDES 291
group children showed even better school attendance than the reference population.
DISCUSSION
We developed a randomized trial of an autonomous model of training for children
with chronic illnesses (asthma and epilepsy), the first of this kind in Latin America.
The program is coordinated by specially trained teachers and supervised by
physicians. The fact that it is placed outside hospital facilities offers children and
families a more appropriate learning environment. This also is thought to increase
community acceptance and generalizability. 41
The refusal rate was low (8.5%). However, between 29.1% and 34.6% of the
experimental group families who were invited and accepted to participate in the
groups did not. We do not believe this to be a problem for the program's external
validity since those who did not come had no differences from the rest of the
population in the variables tested for randomization, and only 5% of those who
did not show up attributed it to lack of interest. Most likely, this effect is related
to the fact that families were invited without previous knowledge regarding the
program, a factor of randomized trials that is included to avoid selection bias.
In this sense, the low rate of dropouts from the program is quite encouraging.
The curriculum design was common to both groups (asthma and epilepsy),
favoring its extension and adaptability to other chronic problems of children.
During the five group sessions, the leading role of the child in the management
of his or her condition is emphasized and, accordingly, so are the new roles for
the adults responsible for the child's care (parents as facilitators and physicians
as consultants).
The training method (for both children and parents) is based on play techniques used in constructivist education, 42 which have been shown to be more
efficient than the passive transmission of knowledge.
Children are given new tools to reinforce and develop their leading role in
their own health care.
This role playing has an important affective and motivational impact. Play, Van
Der Kooij and Hellendoorm said, 43 fosters cognitive development and information processing.
The results obtained suggest that the integration of affective, motivational,
and cognitive elements might have influenced the positive changes observed in
beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors after the program. This was studied first with
the HLCS, both in the children and in their parents. Studies of children's health
beliefs have suggested that children's health management behaviors have a posi- 
292 TIEFFENBERG ET AL.
tive correlation with their mothers' perceptions about their health. 36 We wanted
to test file hypothesis that our autonomous model of training could change this,
whether that change (if produced) influenced the child's health management
decision making, and if this influence was beneficial to his or her health.
Using a multiple correlation model, variables such as age, maternal HLC, and
perception of severity were important predictors of CHLC before the program.
However, after the program, the multiple correlation model vanished as the HLC
of the children in the experimental group increased in internality and became
significantly less associated with external variables (such as maternal beliefs and
socioeconomic level).
When studying the influence of maternal perceptions on school absenteeism
in children with asthma, Parcel et al. 41 observed that absenteeism rates were
higher in children of mothers perceiving their illness as more severe.
School absenteeism has been used extensively to measure variations of children's activities (functionality) according to illness, zs'~
Experimental group children showed a significant decrease in absences from
school after the intervention. These observations, together with the significant
change in internality observed in the CHLCS after the program, suggest that
the positive impact in children's independence is the main factor behind the
improvements seen in their functioning, and that this is best measured by school
absenteeism ("healthy days" present in school).
Many process measures of knowledge, beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors also
showed significant positive changes in both children and parents. These changes,
in turn, helped to explain many of the changes observed in clinical and functional
variables.
Knowledge improved significantly in participating children with asthma and
epilepsy and their parents compared to controls. The positive impact was also
significant in lessening the perceived vulnerability and increasing the children's
assumption of a leading role and self-management behavior.
Family dynamics also improved, with consequences such as increased child
autonomy both in daily life activities (sleeping over at friends' homes) and in
health management (medicine preparation, increased self-monitoring).
In chronic illnesses, another variable with an impact on children's autonomous
behavior is the dependency generated by the relationship with the health care
provider. Perrin and Shapiro, 45 studying the HLC of healthy children and of
children with chronic conditions and their mothers, concluded that young children and children with a chronic illness and their families rely heavily on providers, perhaps to the detriment of learning effective skills for independent health- 
A RANDOMIZED FIELD TRIAL OF ACINDES 293
related decision making. Interestingly, mean HLCS scores obtained in our study
of Argentine healthy children and children with asthma and epilepsy coincide
with those obtained by Perrin and Shapiro in the US. This suggests that our
results could be replicated with US children.
In our study, Argentine children with chronic illnesses obtained lower (more
external) scores than "healthy" children. Children with epilepsy were more external than those with asthma, who, in turn were more external than healthy
children. After the program, however, experimental group children showed a
significant growth in internality, to the point that those with asthma became
more internal than healthy children, and those with epilepsy obtained similar
scores.
Perrin and Shapiro 4s suggested that "internality could be learned," stressing
that "only when children manage to limit the power of others over their health,
will they be able to take charge of their own health behavior. In so doing, they
may well develop an increasingly internal locus of control orientation. "45
The evidence suggests that our program has been successful precisely in this
regard, helping children limit the power of adults and giving them tools to
develop autonomous decision making based on their expected values. This has
a clear impact on better health and well-being.
Results for children with epilepsy are worth a comment. Experimental group
children showed significant progress in clinical variables such as reduction in
the number of seizures and emergency visits and school absenteeism, and their
HLC scores showed statistically significant changes in internality. They remained
more external than children with asthma. After the program, however, they were
indistinguishable from children of the general population. At 12 months, the
results are even stronger than at 6 months, suggesting a long-term impact of the
program.
HLC externality in children with epilepsy has been documented by others. 45
The fact that, in our study, they were able to "learn" enough to become as internal
as any other child has important clinical implications for these children, especially
if we consider that, 12 months after the program, the controls were more external
and had worse clinical outcomes and school absenteeism.
The positive impact of our program for Spanish-speaking, South American
children, most of low socioeconomic status, and the validation by comparable
results on psychometric tests originally designed for use in English-speaking
populations have important implications for transcultural research. ~'47
Hui and Triandis 47 suggest that differences in measurement and impact in
populations of different cultures observed in some papers most likely are due 
294 TIEFFENBERG ET AL.
to methodological problems that emerge from lack of attention to cross-cultural
equivalencies. Our results could not be applied to other Hispanic populations
without careful adaptation and comparative research.
We did develop a curriculum for children with insulin-dependent diabetes
mellitus as well. Even though we did not have a control group, the 28 children
that received training showed similar results as the other experimental group
children, suggesting that the program can also be beneficial for these children.
CONCLUSIONS
1. We developed a school-based model for training children with chronic
illnesses. This is the first program developed in Latin America and the first
curriculum developed for Hispanic children with chronic disorders.
2. This training model differs from others in several ways. It is child-centered
(based on children's expectations), relies on play, and is coordinated by
teachers rather than by health personnel. A curriculum for teacher training
was also developed. This may help its generalizability and implementation
in different settings. Above all, the program underscores the children's
leading role in prevention by training them to recognize early warning
signals.
3. After the intervention, process measures showed significant changes in
knowledge, attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors, including CHLC. Children
increased their sense of well-being, parental anxiety decreased, and family
dynamics improved.
4. The children in the experimental group also showed positive changes in
school absenteeism and in clinical variables (reduction of number of attacks
and emergency and routine visits).
5. Results for epilepsy warrant a special comment. To our knowledge, this is
the first experience of self-help group training successfully developed for
children with epilepsy. Clinical changes were very positive (decreased
number of seizures and emergency visits), and the internality of the CHLC
showed a significant increase at 1-year follow-up. School absenteeism,
child's autonomy, and self-management behavior also improved significantly.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Supported in part by grant 86109186 from the W. T. Grant Foundation. Collaborating centers were as follows: Children's Hospital Ricardo Guti6rrez (J. Grippo,
H. Arroyo, and A. Binelli, Neurology Clinic; C. Ortellao and M. Cohan, Asthma 
A RANDOMIZED FIELD TRIAL OF ACINDES 295
and Allergy; H. Raizman and L. Trifone, Diabetes); National Hospital Gervasio
Posadas (H. Parral, Medical Director; B. Broglia, Asthma; L. C~iceres, Epilepsy
Clinic; and A. Doval, Diabetes), and NIDIA (The Diabetic Child Foundation, J.
Sires, President). Abigail Panter, PhD, kindly revised the data on HLC and very
much helped in editing the manuscript.
REFERENCES
1. Kemp JP. Comprehensive asthma management: guidelines for clinicians. J Asthma.
1998;35(8):601-620.
2. Green M, Haggerty RJ. Ambulatory Pediatrics II. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co.; 1977.
3. Hughes DM, Mc Leod M, Jones B, Golbloom R. Controlled trial of a home and ambulatory program for asthmatic children. Pediatrics. 1991;87:54-61.
4. American Lung Association. The Many Faces of Asthma. American Lung Association
Annual Report. 1988, p. 9.
5. Mao Y, Semenciw R, Morrison H, et al. Increased rates of illness and death from asthma
in Canada. Can Med Assoc J. 1987;137:620-624.
6. Wolfish MG, McLean J. Chronic illness in adolescents. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1974;
21(4):1043-1045.
7. Fireman P, Friday GA, Gira C, Vierthaler WA, Michaels L. Teaching self-management
skills to asthmatic children and their parents in an ambulatory care setting. Pediatrics.
1981;68:341-348.
8. National Asthma Education and Prevention Program. Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma. Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health; 1995. Publication 96-
3659 A.
9. National Asthma Education Program. Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma.
Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health; 1991. Publication 91-3042 A.
10. Sly RM. Changing asthma mortality and sales of inhaled bronchodilators and antiasthmatic drugs. Ann Allergy. 1994;73:439-443.
11. Workshop proceedings on self-management of childhood asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1983;72:$519-$626.
12. Taggart VJ, Zuckerman A, Lucas S, Acty-Lindsey A, Bellanti J. Adapting a self-management education program for asthma for use in an outpatient clinic. Ann Allergy. 1987;
58(3):173-178.
13. Parker S, Wolfe J, eds. Asthma self-management: a second generation of research
programs. Health Educ Q. 1987;14(3).
14. Gross A, Magalnick L, Richardson P. Self-management training with families of insulindependent diabetic children: a controlled long-term investigation. Child Faro Behav Ther.
1985;7(1).
15. Childhood Asthma Management Program Research Group. Recruitment of participants
in the Childhood Asthma Management Program (CAMP). I. Description of methods.
J Asthma. 1999;36(3):217-237.
16. Thapar A. Educating asthmatic patients in primary care: a pilot study of small groups
education. Faro Pract. 1994;11(1):39-43.
17. Stein R, Perrin E, Pless B, et al. Severity of illness: concepts and measurements. Lancet.
1987;2:1506-1509.
18. Piaget J. The Equilibration of Cognitive Structures. The Central Problem of Intellectual Development. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press; 1975, 1985.
19. Piaget J. Les Relations Entre l'Affectivite et l'Intelligence dans le Dfveloppement Mental de
l'Enfant. Paris: Centre de Documentation Universitaire. Published in part in: Piaget J.
Intelligence and Affectivity: Their Relation During Child Development. Palo Alto, CA: Annual Reviews, 1954-1981.
20. Piaget J. The Moral Judgement of the Child. London: Free Press; 1932, 1965. 
296 TIEFFENBERG ET AL.
21. Rotter JIB. Social Learning and Clinical Psychology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall;
1954.
22. Wallston K, Kaplan C, Maides S, Wallston B. Development and validation of the health
locus of control (HLC) scale. J Clin Psychol. 1976;44:580-585.
23. Wallston K, Wallston B. Health Locus of Control Scales. Research with the Locus of Control
construct: 1981, p. 11.
24. Bandura A. Psychological aspects of prognostic judgments. In: Evans RW, Baskin DS,
Yatsu FM, eds. Prognosis in Neurological Disease. New York, NY: Oxford University
Press; 1990.
25. Parcel G, Nader P. Evaluation of a pilot school health education program for asthmatic
children. J School Health. October 1977;453-456.
26. Lewis CH, Rachelefsky G, Lewis MA, De La Sota A, Kaplan M. A randomized trial
of ACT for kids. Pediatrics. 1984;74(4):478-486.
27. DeVries R, Kohlberg L. Constructivist Early Education: Overview and Comparison with
Other Programs. Washington, DC: National Association for the Education of Young
Children; 1990.
28. SPSS/PC + Advanced Statistics, Cluster Analysis--Statistics Guide. 1986:B71.
29. Everitt BS. Cluster Analysis. London, England: Heineman; 1980.
30. Romesburg HC. Cluster Analysis for Researchers. Belmont, CA: Lifetime Learning Publishers; 1984.
31. Easlon J, Hillman B, Shapiro G, et al. Management of asthma. Pediatrics. 1981;68:
874-879.
32. Richards W, and the AAP Committee of the Section of Allergy and Immunology.
Principles of diagnosis and management of asthma for the practicing physician. Consensus statement report presented at: AAP Annual Meeting; October 1989.
33. Harris D. El Test de Goodenough: Revisi6n, Amplicaci6n y Actualizaci6n. Buenos Aires,
Argentina: Paidos; 1981:384.
34. Parcel CS, Meyer MP. Development of an instrument to measure children's health
locus of control. Health Educ Monogr. 1978;6(2):149-159.
35. Wood I, Carlini MT, Tieffenberg JA. Monitoring changes in health-related attitudes
and beliefs of children with chronic disorders: results using a children's Health Locus
of Control Scale. In: Latin American Society for Pediatric Research Proceedings of the
16th Annual Meeting; November 1988. Abstract 62.
36. O'Brien R, Bush P, Parcel C. Stability in a measure of children's Health Locus of
Control. J School Health. 1989;59(4):161-164.
37. Duncan D. A significance test for differences between ranked treatments in an analysis
of variance. Va J Sci. 1951;2:171-189.
38. Mann HB, Whitney DR. On a test of whether one or two random variables is statistically
larger than the other. Ann Math Stat. 1947;18:50-60.
39. Colditz C, Miller J, Mosteller F. Measuring gain in the evaluation of medical technology: the probability of a better outcome. Int J Technol Assess Health Care. 1988;4:637-
642.
40. Parcel G, Gilman S, Nader P, Bunce H. A comparison of absentee rates of elementary
schoolchildren with asthma and nonasthmatic schoolmates. Pediatrics. 1979;64(6):878-
881.
41. Krutzsch C, Bellicha T, Parker S. Making childhood asthma management education
happen in the community: translating health behavioral research into local programs.
Health Educ Q. 1987;14(3):357-373.
42. DeVries R, Kamii C. Why Group Games? A Piagetian Perspective. Urbana, IL: Eric Publications Office; 1975.
43. Van Der Kooij R, Hellendoorm J, eds. Play--Play Therapy--Play Research: International
Symposium, Amsterdam, the Netherlands, September 1985.
44. Bransky RE. A study of absence from school. Med Officer. 1951;86:223-237. 
A RANDOMIZED FIELD TRIAL OF ACINDES 297
45. Perrin E, Shapiro E. Health locus of control beliefs of healthy children, children with
a chronic physical illness, and their mothers. Pediatrics. 1985;107:627-633.
46. Hui Ch. Locus of Control: a review of cross-cultural research. Int J Intercultural Relations. 1982;6:301-323(a).
47. Hui Ch, Triandis HC. Multistrategy approach to cross-cultural research: the case of
Locus of Control. ] Cross Cultural Psychol. 1983;14(1):65-83. 