Epilepsia, 32(3): 365-374, 199 1
Raven Press, Ltd., New York
0 International League Against Epilepsy
Impact of the Children’s Epilepsy Program on Parents
Mary Ann Lewis, “Corrine L. Hatton, tInes Salas, $Barbara Leake, and
ONelly Chiofalo
Departments of PsychlMentul Health and Administration, and #Medicine School of Nursing and Division of General
Internal Medicine, Health Services Research, School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, CA, U.S.A.;
*Private Practice, Psychotherapy and Consultation; tFaculty of Medicine, University of Chile, Santiago; and
jlnstitute oj Neurosurgery and Brain Research, Santiago, Chile
Summary: A randomized controlled trial was conducted
in Santiago, Chile to test the efficacy of the Children’s
Epilepsy Program, a child-centered, family-focused intervention developed and pilot tested in Los Angeles, CA,
U.S.A., using a counseling model for parents of children
with seizure disorders to help them (a) deal with their
anger, resentment, and grief related to the loss of a normal child; (b) increase their knowledge about caring for
their child; (c) reduce anxieties related to having a child
with a seizure disorder; and (d) improve their decisionmaking skills. All parents were pretested and then
retested 5 months after the educational interventions.
Parents in the experimental group (n = 185) and their
children separately attended four 1 %-h sessions and then
met together at the end of each session to share learning
experiences. Comparison group parents (n = 180) and
their children jointly attended three 2-h lecture sessions
followed by question-and-answer periods. Although parents’ overall knowledge of epilepsy was relatively high
initially, it improved considerably in both comparison and
experimental groups. With regard to anxiety, at the 5-
month evaluation, experimental group parents and mothers in particular were more likely than control parents to
state that they were less anxious (p < 0.001), and their
anxiety, as measured by the Taylor Manifest Anxiety
scale, was significantly reduced (p < 0.01). Key Words:
Epilepsy-Seizures-Parentkhild relations-Family relationships-Health promotion-Patient educationChile.
Several studies report parents’ perceptions of the
effects of seizures on their children and detail their
expectations of and interactions with these children. Parents of children with epilepsy perceive
their children as immature, difficult, and deficient in
psychosocial skills (Gregoriodes, 1972; Ferrari, et
al., 1983). They report feelings of guilt as well as
fears of intellectual deterioration, personality disorders, insanity, and the untoward side effects of
drugs (Tavriger, 1966; McGrath, 1972; Ward and
Bower, 1978). Parents transmit their fears of disclosing a diagnosis of “fits” and their own feelings
of shame to their children (Kleck, 1968). They also
expect less from their children with epilepsy, impose stricter disciplinary rules, and expect more
emotional problems (Long and Moore, 1979).
Received August 1989; revision accepted June 1990.
Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr. M. A.
Lewis at School of Nursing, Psych/Mental Health and Administration, 10833 LeConte Ave., University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90024-6917, U.S.A. .
For parents and their afflicted children, the unpredictability of the occurrence of seizures creates
a sense of helplessness and lack of control, with
subsequent feelings of rejection, anxiety, and depression (Hughes and Jablow, 1958; Goldin and
Margolin, 1975). Parents’ anxiety related to the
risks associated with seizures may enhance their
tendencies to overprotect and restrict the activities
of their children with epilepsy. This anxiety, coupled with the uncertainty related to their children’s
future independence as adults, is likely to result in
pretending, keeping the seizure disorder a secret,
and “living in the closet” (DeVallis and DeVallis,
1988) and the subsequent disabling effects associated with isolation for both the children and their
parents.
Efforts to help parents deal with their children’s
seizures have included education groups (Shope,
1980) and individual or group counseling to increase
understanding of the child’s reactions to seizures
and adopt strategies to cope with their children’s
seizure disorders (Slimmer, 1979). Some investiga365 
366 M. A. LEWIS ET AL.
tors have explored parental attitudes in relation to
coping behaviors of families (Austin and McDermott, 1988). However, there have been no reports
of a randomized trial of the effects of a childcentered, family-focused intervention using a counseling model for parents that helps them cope with
the burden of parenting a chronically ill child.
Maternity nurses (McLenahan, 1962; Kallus,
1965) and physicians (Brooks et al., 1962; Engle,
1964) have long advocated the therapeutic value of
helping parents of newborn infants with physical
abnormalities to acknowledge them, to grieve, to
cope with their pain over loss of a normal infant.
Using this helping model for parents, the parental
component of the Children's Epilepsy Program was
designed to help parents acknowledge their grief,
anger, and fears regarding their child's seizure disorder, as well as to understand the disorder better.
The children's component of the program focused
on enhancing knowledge, self-esteem, self-care,
and social and communication skills, thus promoting responsibility on the part of the child, decreasing parental anxiety, and making it easier for both
the children and their parents to live with the attendant stresses of epilepsy (Lewis et al., 1990).
We report the impact on parents of a randomized
controlled trial of the Children's Epilepsy Program.
We demonstrated previously that children who par1 Group Supuort to Acknowledae Feelinas 1 : Grief and Loss of
"Normal" Child
: Potential long-term
dependency of child
: Fears of Side-Effects
of Medications
: Incompetencies of Dealing
with child's behaviors
: Disappointment of child's
Academic Achievement and
Self as Parent
ticipated in this skill-based program significantly b
creased their knowledge related to managing s61
zures and also perceived themselves to be more so.
cially skilled (Lewis et al., 1990). We hypothesized
that although parents would be reasonably knowledgeable about epilepsy, further enhancing that
knowledge and helping them share their grief over
loss of a normal child and their subsequent guilt and
anger would make them less anxious and more willing to talk openly with their child who had seizures.
We also hypothesized that enhancing their knowledge and decision-making skills would alter thei
parenting behaviors in terms of becoming less restrictive of children's activities and permitting thei
children to participate in making decisions regarding self-care activities to control their seizures.
METHODS
Pilot study
The intervention was developed and pilot tested
at The University of California, Los Angeles
(UCLA), U.S.A., with 40 children and their families. Figure 1 shows the model and content of the
intervention in terms of the objectives and outcomes for parents.
The intervention
The parents' sessions used a helping and counseling model (Rogers, 1951) that included the folEnhance Knowledae Related to
: Seizure Management : Systems theory
: Consequences of dysfunctional
(How Family Functions)
Family Functioning
I
Decision-Makins Skills to ImDrove
: Rules for discipline among family members : Areas appropriate for children to make
: Parents vs child's rights : Strategies to gain social support outside : the family
decisions
I
1
OUTCOHEB
Improved
* Decision Makinq
- Knowledae about Seizures
Related to Seizure Management
Reduced
Anxietv
- Guilt
FIG. 1. Model of the parents' component for the Children's Epilepsy Program.
Epilepsia, Vol. 32, No. 3, 1991 
PARENTS: THE CHILDREN’S EPILEPSY PROGRAM 367
lowing: (a) acknowledging the pain and grief associated with loss of a normal child; (b) identifying
how the family functioned as a system, including
identification of the roles of individual family members, methods used to distribute power and control,
and procedures to resolve family conflict; (c) practicing decision-making processes as related to permitting children greater involvement in decisions
about self-care and certain social activities, e.g.,
“sleep-overs’’ ; and (d) rallying social support and
resources from parents in the group, relatives, and
friends to cope with being a parent of a child with a
chronic disease. During the course of the four sessions, parents reviewed the content of the children’s sessions: Understanding Body Messages;
Controlling Seizures with Medicines; Telling Others
Matter-of-Factly; Coping and Balancing My Life.
(See Lewis et al., 1990 for a comprehensive description of the children’s component of the program.)
The underlying philosophy that parents want to be
“good” parents and do their best to achieve that
goal was emphasized throughout the sessions. Parents were also told that parenting a normal child,
i.e., one without a chronic disorder, was a major
challenge and that raising a child with a seizure disorder was an even greater challenge. The parental
sessions were organized as follows.
Session I: Telling a story
Parents introduced and told something about
themselves, their child, and their experiences in
parenting a child with a seizure disorder. They
sorted cards with printed statements into fact or
fiction categories to learn information related to seizure disorders and thereby dispel false perceptions
and myths about epilepsy.
Session 2: Making decisions
The decision-making process (Janis and Mann,
1977) was presented to help parents learn to deal
with a general problem unrelated to epilepsy and
then to apply the same process to problems of being
a parent of a child with seizures. Parents used personal or family problems to practice these decisionmaking skills.
Session 3: Working as a family system
The analogy of the smoothness with which a bicycle is propelled when all parts work well together
was used to help parents identify the roles of family
members and understand how their child’s seizure
disorder has impact on the functioning of their family. Discussion centered on similarities and differences in parenting styles.
Session 4: Coping and adapting
The discussion on coping and adapting summarized the roles of parents in sharing power among
family members and letting go and allowing children
to make decisions related to preventing seizures
and caring for themselves. Parents were also advised to encourage their children, family members,
and friends to talk more openly about the “family
secret.” The session ended with each parent responding to the question “If you had one wish to
make, what would you wish for?” Subsequent discussion acknowledged the pain and grieving associated with parenting a child with a chronic disease.
The theoretical framework for the intervention is
shown in Fig. 1.
Experimental design
To test the program’s effectiveness, a randomized controlled trial was conducted in Santiago,
Chile, where the Liga de Epilepsia offered the opportunity to involve some of the 1,000 families
served by the Liga. We selected a sample of 252
children aged 7-14 years from 1,000 families in the
Liga’s files and randomly assigned them to an experimental group (n = 126) or a comparison group
(n = 126). These children received care from neurologists in private practice as well as from the National Health Service in Santiago.
The parents in the experimental group completed
the program previously described. The parents in
the control group, accompanied by their children,
attended three 2-h sessions conducted by a physician. Because of ethical concerns related to providing no treatment at all to a control group (i.e., a fear
that a delayed treatment for this group might be
logistically impossible), and because of a desire to
provide a comparable amount of attention to avoid
the Hawthorne effect, we provided this randomly
selected group of parents a “cognitively oriented
treatment .” This included a lecture-presentation
followed by a discussion-question-answer period to
provide information and reassurance related to raising a child with epilepsy. Thus, the comparison in
terms of “treatment” is between a traditional educational format (passive learning) and a childcentered family-focused (active learning) program
which embedded information in the context of acknowledging feelings and gaining skills.
Measurement
Using the experience gained in the pilot study, we
developed questionnaires and selected instruments
to obtain information immediately before the program and 5 months after the program ended. A
structured interview was designed to obtain demographic data (e.g., gender, ethnicity, education, occupation, and number of persons living at home).
Information related to seizure disorder and level of
seizure control before beginning the program was
Epilepsia, Vol. 32, No. 3, 1991 
368 M. A. LEWIS ET AL.
obtained. Also included were questions regarding
parents’ perception of problems (e.g., emotional,
social, financial), sources of support, and relationships with other children.
A paper-pencil test was developed to measure
parents’ knowledge regarding types of seizure disorders, onset of symptoms, role of medicines and
their side effects, and postictal care. The test included the importance of positive health habits and
lifestyle.
Taylor’s Manifest Anxiety Scale, a score based
on 50 self-report items drawn from the Minnesota
Multiphasic Personality Inventory, was used to assess the anxiety of parents (Taylor, 1953). The
items relate to perceptions and bodily manifestations of stress, emotions, psychological distress,
and loss of self-esteem.
A pencil-paper open-ended questionnaire, administered to parents at the posttest, was used to assess
the impact of the program. Questions concerned the
most important things learned, changes in family
functioning, skills in dealing with seizures, perceived changes in anxiety, as well as requests for
suggestions with regard to the program.
Trained interviewers (teachers, social workers,
and nurses) administered the evaluation instruments to the control and experimental parents immediately before the first session. Parents were also
interviewed 5 months after the educational programs ended. Ten percent of the sample were reinterviewed (both pre- and postintervention) by one
of the investigators (I.S.) to assess the test-retest
reliability of the data, which was 96%.
Two important outcomes shown in Fig. 1, parents’ decision-making and reduced guilt, were not
measured quantitatively. Although teaching decision-making skills was a basic component of the
theoretical framework for the intervention, a lack of
standardized instruments prevented assessment of
changes in this dependent variable. The same problem applied to measuring reduction in guilt.
Analytic techniques
The sociodemographic characteristics of the
treatment and control groups were compared by
chi-square analyses. McNemar’s test of symmetry
was used to examine pre- and posttest changes in
knowledge for each item on the test. The test assesses whether change occurs around the diagonal
in a square table; in this case, we used it to measure
whether the changes in responses over time from
incorrect to correct were equal to the changes from
correct to incorrect. Chi-square tests were also
used to compare the proportions of the control and
treatment groups answering each item correctly on
the pre- and posttests.
The internal consistency of the Taylor Manifest
Anxiety Scale when applied to these subjects was
measured by calculation of Chronbach’s alpha coefficient. Group differences in baseline and 5-month
experimental and control anxiety scores and in preand posttest changes in the parents’ scores on anxiety were compared by Student’s t test. Chi-square
analyses were used to assess the proportions of parents providing different responses to questions
about the program’s efficacy.
RESULTS
Pilot study: Los Angeles, CA, U.S.A.
Qualitative data obtained using ethnographic
techniques and observation of the parents’ sessions
indicated that parents were knowledgeable about
managing seizures but concerned and ambivalent
about medical treatment; e.g., they acknowledged
the role of medicines to control seizures, but expressed concerns about addiction to drugs and
about drug side effects. Several parents admitted to
searching for holistic and non-Western medical modalities to stop the seizures, e.g., dietary restrictions, herbs, potions, and acupuncture. In terms of
knowledge, they knew less about the specific measures to take for their child during a seizure than
about any other topic.
During the program, parents also varied in their
willingness to allow their children with epilepsy to
participate in social activities other than family activities. In most instances, they agreed they were
overprotective. In each group of 610 parents, however, at least one parent or a set of parents allowed
their child to be as active as possible, e.g., skate,
ride bicycles, sleep at a friend’s house, attend summer camp, and participate in group sports. These
parents summarized their position with the statement, “We cannot watch her/him day and night.”
They stated that their child would have to assume
the responsibility of dealing with a seizure in the
company of others. They admitted that it had taken
time for them to arrive at this state of coping with
their child’s epilepsy.
To the question: “If you had one wish for your
child, what would that be?”, parents in a roundrobin fashion responded that they hoped that their
child’s seizures would be “cured.” They hoped that
their child would outgrow the seizures and be
“normal.” Several parents, including fathers, cried
during this part of the session. We acknowledged
the parents’ pain but expressed admiration for their
Epilepsia, Vol. 32, No. 3, 1991 
PARENTS: THE CHILDREN’S EPILEPSY PROGRAM 369
courage in dealing with the affliction. We concluded
by highlighting their strengths and positively reinforcing their skills as parents.
Telephone interviews after the program indicated
that parents’ knowledge related to managing seizures had increased. Parents also reported an increased appreciation for the role of medicines in
controlling seizures, but a few parents admitted that
they continued to search for nonmedical treatments
to “cure” their child’s seizures. Parents also stated
that they were more relaxed about their child and
that they felt comforted by having the experience of
sharing with other parents in the program. They
indicated that the opportunity to talk openly and to
share their fears and anxieties with other parents, as
well as their spouses, was therapeutic. Parents
stated that they felt more hopeful and better prepared to help their children cope with managing
their seizure disorders. They also reported that they
wanted to maintain contact with the other families
and hoped that we would provide follow-up sessions.
The randomized trial: Santiago, Chile
Table 1 shows the characteristics of parents in
relation to education, socioeconomic status, occupation, and number of educational sessions attended. The majority of both control and experimental group parents (81 and 74%) lived together
with their child who had epilepsy. Few parents in
both groups (4 and 5%) had attended other educational programs. Maternal educational levels differed: Mothers in the control group (66%) were
more likely than experimental mothers (40%) to
have attended high school and technical programs.
The majority of both groups of mothers were homemakers (69 and 74%).
The educational background of control and experimental group fathers was not significantly different (Table I). More than half of the fathers in
both groups had attended high school and technical
programs (55 vs. 47%) or a university (14 vs. 11%).
Neither was there any overall difference in the distributions of occupations between control and experimental group fathers. In terms of attendance for
the educational programs, 5040% of control and
experimental fathers attended all sessions. Maternal attendance was better: 73% of experimental
mothers attended the maximum number of possible
sessions, as did 62% of control mothers.
Knowledge
Table 2 shows changes over time (before and after the programs) in the parents’ knowledge of seizures for both the control and experimental groups.
TABLE 1. Characteristics of parents who participated
in the Children’s Epilepsy Program
Parameter
No. of mothers
No. of fathers
Family (%)
Both parents in home
Attended other
Low socioeconomic status
Education
educational program
Mother (%)
SGrade 8
High school and technical
University
Occupation
Homemaker
Unskilled
Skilled
Middle management
Employment full time
Father (%)
Education
None
<Grade 8
High school and technical
University
Occupation
Unemployed
Unskilled
Skilled
Middle management
No. of sessions attended (%)
Mother
0
1
2
3
4
Father
0
1
2
3
4
Control Experimental
(n = 180) (n = 185) -~
109
71
81 .O
4.3
98.3
27.0
66.0
7.0
69.0
6.5
16.0
8.0
22.4
0
30.0
55.1
14.0
4.0
13.0
58.0
24.6
2.0
15.0
21.0
62.0
NA~
10.0
12.0
29.0
49.0
NA
__
120
65
73.8
4.8
100.0
50.5
40.0
10.0
74.0
8.5
12.0
5.0
13.6
0
30.3
47.4
10.6
9.0
14.0
63.0
14.0
.8
5.0
5.0
16.0
73.2
4.0
9.0
11.0
17.0
59.0
Chi-square = p < 0.001.
Not applicable because there were only three sessions for
the control group.
Results of chi-square tests for group differences on
posttest scores and McNemar’s tests comparing
pre- and posttest scores of individual parents in the
two groups are also shown. No significant differences in knowledge were noted between the control
and experimental groups before the programs were
begun. Overall, parents’ initial knowledge of epilepsy was relatively high for both the control and
experimental groups.
The McNemar’s tests for symmetry (Table 2)
show that the control parents’ knowledge improved
significantly (p < 0.001) on five items: (a) inappropriateness of inserting objects in the mouth during a
seizure, (b) nonapplication of physical restraints
Epilepsia, Vol. 32, No. 3, 1991 
370 M. A. LEWIS ET AL.
TABLE 2. Percentage of experimental and control group parents responding correctly to knowledge items before and
afrer the educational programs
Knowledge
Five months
Before program after program
Control Experimental Control Experimental
(n = 180) (n = 185) (n = 180) (n = 185) p Values“
Take medicines exactly as prescribed
During seizure, no objects in mouth
During seizure, do not restrain
After seizure, emergency room visit
Loss of sleep can trigger seizures
Seizures start in the brain
Purpose of EEG
Drug blood levels to monitor dosage
Minimal restriction of activities
Sports OK
not required
97.8
35.6
56.7
71.1
66.3
86.7
81.1
67.2
93.3
73.3
94.6
35.3
52.2
68.1
62.7
86.0
80.0
63.4
88.6
80.5
99.0
76.1b
81.1’
88.3’
65.2
90.0
83.3
87.8’
97.2
90.0h
97.3
78.8‘
76.3‘
93.0’
50.3‘
93.5”
90.3‘
79.6’
96.7’
95.1’
NS
NS
NS
NS
.oos
NS
.05
.04
NS
NS ~
a Chi-square tests for group differences (control vs. experimental) on post-test scores. ’ p < 0.001, ‘p < 0.005, “p < 0.01 for McNemars test.
during a seizure, (c) inappropriateness of an emergency room visit after a seizure, (d) diagnostic value
of serum levels to monitor medications, and (e) appropriateness of participating in athletic activities.
For one other variable, taking medicines correctly,
there was little room for improvement.
Experimental group parents (Table 2) improved
significantly (p < 0.001) on the same five items. In
addition, they correctly identified the inappropriateness of restricting activities, learned the value of
the EEG in evaluation and monitoring, and improved their knowledge regarding the origin of seizures in the brain. Like the controls, they initially
appreciated the importance of taking medicine correctly and maintained that knowledge, but they erroneously changed their opinions regarding the role
of loss of sleep in triggering seizures. Although
some group differences were noted in posttest item
scores, an overall knowledge index formed by adding the number of items answered correctly showed
no significant pre- or posttest group differences (p
> 0.05, Student’s t test). Furthermore, parents who
did not attend all sessions improved their knowledge as much as those who did, so that knowledge
appeared to be communicated quickly with use of
either format.
Parental anxiety
Information concerning parents’ anxiety is shown
in Table 3. The internal consistency of the items in
the Taylor Manifest Anxiety Scale, as measured by
Chronbach’s alpha, was 0.85 in this sample on the
pretest. For each parent, the number of positive
responses (i.e., responses indicating anxiety) to the
50 items was multiplied by 2, producing an anxiety
scale score with a range of 0-100. The mothers in
both groups had higher anxiety scores than the fathers, both before and after the programs (Table 3).
No significant group differences in parental anxiety
were noted initially. Student’s t tests on exit minus
entry scores showed that the anxiety of experimental group parents, and of mothers in particular, decreased more than that of controls.
To determine the effects of attending all of the
educational sessions versus only some (i.e., the
“dose” effect of the interventions), we performed
two-way analysis of variance on exit-entry changes
in parents’ anxiety scores. This analysis simultaTABLE 3. Mean anxiety scores of control and experimental group parents before and at five months
after the programs
Control
Mothers Fathers
Time (n = 108) (n = 68)
Experimental
Both Mothers Fathers Both
(n = 176) (n = 111) (n = 64) (n = 175)
Before programa 54.0 44.1 50.2 56.0 46.5 52.5
Five months after program 52.6 42.6 48.7 50.7’ 43.1 47.9‘ ~ ~ ~
a Sample size reflects missing values.
Experimental group mothers’ anxiety scores decreased more than those of control group mothers (p = 0.01).
Experimental group parents’ anxiety scores decreased more than those of control group parents (p < 0.01).
Epilepsia, Vol. 32, No. 3, 1991 
PARENTS: THE CHILDREN’S EPILEPSY PROGRAM 3 71
neously assessed the importance of participating in
the experimental as opposed to the control intervention program, the importance of complete versus incomplete attendance, and the interaction between these two main effects. The only significant
result was that experimental group parents’ anxiety
was reduced more than that of control parents (p <
0.01).
When similar analyses were performed for mothers and fathers separately, again no attendancerelated effects were noted. Nevertheless, in terms
of simple numeric change scores, experimental
group mothers who attended all sessions had the
greatest decrease in anxiety (- 5.44). Although
there was insufficient power to detect group or attendance-related differences among fathers alone,
there was a significant decrease (p < 0.05, paired t
test) in the anxiety scores of experimental group
fathers who attended all sessions (- 3.54).
Perceptions of the programs’ efficacy
Parents were asked: “What was the most important thing you learned from the program?” They
were permitted two responses. Both control (48%)
and, to a greater extent, experimental group parents
(59%) indicated that they had gained knowledge (p
< 0.05). Furthermore, experimental parents were
more likely than control parents to believe that recognizing the importance of medicines was their
most significant gain (19 vs. 9%; p < 0.01). None of
the parents reported decision-making skills as the
most important thing learned, however.
In terms of accepting their child’s seizure disorder, one fifth of control and experimental parents
stated that such acceptance was the most important
gain. More than one third of control and experimental parents indicated that “better parenting” was
their primary gain. Only a small fraction of both
groups of parents (3%) reported that downward
comparison (e.g., not feeling as bad off as others)
was of major importance. Less than 5% of parents
in both groups cited either increased communication in the family or a decrease in overprotectiveness. Very few parents in the control group (1%)
and only slightly more in the experimental group
(5%) reported support from other parents as their
most important gain (p < 0.05, Fisher’s exact test).
To the question, “Do you deal with your child’s
seizure disorder differently after the sessions?”,
only 29% of control group parents and 21% of experimental group parents responded affirmatively.
In both groups, virtually all respondents (97%) indicated that fathers had not increased their roles in
parenting, and only a handful of parents believed
they were less vigilant. Nevertheless, approximately one quarter of parents in both groups said
they were more accepting of, and optimistic about,
their child’s seizure disorder. With respect to anxiety stemming from their child’s condition, experimental group parents were more than three times
more likely than control group parents to report
feeling less anxious and fearful (31 vs. lo%, p <
0.001).
To the question, “Are you, as a family, doing
anything different as a result of attending the
program?”, 63% of control and 53% of experimental group parents answered that they were not doing
anything differently. One fifth of the control and
one quarter of the experimental group parents did
report better communication among family members, however.
In terms of finding the classes helpful, only a
small minority of control group parents (6%) reported no benefit. All experimental group parents
endorsed the child-centered, family-focused program. Although this difference in perceived benefit
was not great, it was statistically significant (p <
0.001, Fisher’s exact test).
DISCUSSION
This cross-national randomized trial of an intervention designed to help parents of a child with seizure disorders to deal with the anger, resentment,
and grief related to the loss of a normal child and to
alter parenting approaches related to including the
child in decision-making relevant to their seizures is
apparently the first report of its kind in the literature. The data support the hypothesis that as a
group parents were knowledgeable about many aspects of their children’s seizure disorder. However,
individual control and experimental parents increased their knowledge regarding the care of their
child during and after a seizure. Control and experimental parents both learned more about specific
treatment and seizure care. In an effort to persuade
parents to be less restrictive, group leaders may
have deemphasized the requirement for sleep,
TABLE 4. Effects of total or partial attendance at
sessions on changes of parents’ pre- and posttest
mean anxiety scores
Attendance at sessions
All Some
Group n (Score) n (Score)
Mothers 85 (-5.44) 26 (-4.85)
Experimental
Fathers 39 (-4.97) 25 (-2.24)
Control
Mothers 67 (- 3.06) 40 (- 2.15)
Fathers 33 (-1.82) 34 (-1.26)
Epilepsia, Vol. 32, No. 3, 1991 
372 M. A. LEWIS ET AL.
thereby accounting for the only reduction in correct
responses among experimental parents. This is the
only explanation we have for the observed changes.
One of the most important cognitive gains observed in this study concerns emergency room usage. Improving the knowledge and skills of parents
to manage seizures at home so that they do not feel
compelled to take their child to an emergency room
benefits the family in terms of demands on their
time, as well as in terms of the worry and discomfort associated with visiting an emergency room. It
is also important in reducing the immediate and
overall costs of services for the health care system.
Perhaps even more important, children as future
adults with epilepsy might be better prepared to
care for themselves if they observe their parents
taking a more relaxed approach in caring for them.
Parents who demonstrate improved decision making related to seizure care for their children might
also be more likely to improve their parenting skills
in other dimensions as well. Unfortunately, we
have no data on actual emergency room visits to
provide a behavioral validation of the self-reports.
Despite these gains in parental knowledge, the
data do not support the hypothesis that as a result of
the intervention parents would be less restrictive
and permit their children to participate more often
in making decisions regarding self-care activities
and seizure control. Indeed, both control and experimental parents reported no change in their levels of protectiveness. Changing a family’s approach
to decision-making by involving the child may be
almost counter-cultural and probably requires far
more intensive intervention than was provided in
this trial. Considering their long history of being
fearful and anxious regarding their child’s safety
and welfare, the continuing overprotectiveness of
the parents is perhaps not surprising. However, we
can only speculate about the potential benefits of
reduced anxiety reported by both control and experimental mothers at the 5-month follow-up. A reduction in maternal anxiety could have considerable impact for the child with epilepsy, other children in the family, and spouses. Probably even a
slightly more relaxed family environment improves
a family’s ability to function more effectively.
The data demonstrate that parents in Los Angeles
and Santiago shared similar concerns regarding
their children. They possessed a great deal of information, but their most significant deficits were in
the affective domain, i.e., fears and anxiety likely to
influence their interactions with their child. The extent of their anxiety at the pretest is indicated by a
mean score close to 50 on a scale formed from the
Taylor Manifest Anxiety items as compared with a
mean of -30 (or 15 on the Taylor scale of 0-50
points) obtained from a group of university students
(Taylor, 1953). Although the reported changes in
anxiety were statistically significant, no data exist
to allow interpretation of their clinical significance.
Taylor, who developed the scale, indicated that
these changes might well be clinically significant
(Taylor, 1990, personal communication).
Parents in Los Angeles told us that the opportunity to express their fears and share experiences
with group leaders who cared, along with others
who were in similar situations, was most comforting. Perhaps for clinicians the most important steps
to reducing anxiety include acknowledging parents’
concerns and fears, as well as giving them permission to cry, to be afraid, and to discuss their pain
and discomfort. Providing parents the opportunity
to grieve openly and then positively reinforcing
them for their strengths and courage in conjunction
with physical manifestations of concern (touching
or hugging) may well be one of the most important
aspects of a therapeutic treatment plan.
The reduction in anxiety, especially among experimental group mothers, indicates that the childcentered, family-focused program did have positive
impact on mothers. Control group mothers who attended all sessions also had some reduction in anxiety ( - 3.06), suggesting that attendance at lectures
with an opportunity to ask questions is important.
Clinically, we speculate that reduced anxiety improves an individual’s ability to function as a family
member. Although the pretest level of anxiety of
fathers in both experimental and control groups was
relatively low, the anxiety levels of experimental
group fathers who attended all sessions changed almost as much as those of comparable mothers.
The relatively low anxiety of both experimental
and control group fathers raises questions and deserves further study regarding parenting roles and
caring for a child with a chronic disease. Our observations from both the pilot study of fathers in the
Children’s Epilepsy Program (Lewis et al., 1990)
and fathers in the English-speaking and Latino
Asthma Care Training Programs (Lewis et al., 1984,
1987) reinforce our clinical experiences related to
mothers assuming the major responsibility of caring
for chronically ill children. Despite the structural
factors related to fathers’ primary roles of economic
support, we have observed both a skepticism and
hesitancy of many fathers to acknowledge either the
seriousness or potential future impact of the chronic
disease on their child, spouse, and other family
members. We interpret the denial behaviors of fathers as a coping mechanism to deal with the frightening aspects of reality. Under such circumstances,
Epilepsia, Vol. 32, No. 3, 1991 
PARENTS: THE CHILDREN’S EPILEPSY PROGRAM 3 73
parents of a chronically ill child deserve mental
health referrals for appropriate services to maintain
their integrity as a family and to prevent parents’
separation and divorce. Despite the need for referrals, our experiences suggest that although parents
recognize the need for mental health services, they
often are ambivalent and reluctant to seek such services. Therefore, it may often be not only less
costly, but also more effective for physicians and
nurses to improve their own counseling skills to
help parents acknowledge their feelings and resolve
the conflicts related to parenting a child with epilepsy. Certainly, physicians and nurses who are
willing to participate in continuing education programs to increase their own mental health helping
skills are likely to be more effective and experience
less frustration in providing services to families and
children with seizure disorders.
It is encouraging that a relatively brief, childcentered and family-focused intervention (10 h) has
the potential to reduce anxiety among parents and
perhaps help them to view their children more positively. Certainly, future efforts should include
booster sessions to reduce anxiety further and to
reinforce parents’ efforts to improve parenting
practices related to living with a child who has epilepsy.
Future studies should also target fathers to gain
knowledge about their coping mechanisms, in addition to increasing their participation in the process
of caring for their afflicted child. Attention to this
aspect of a family intervention might significantly
improve the functioning of families with children
who have seizure disorders. Evidence from the randomized trial of the Asthma Care Training Program
for Kids, a child-centered, family-focused intervention for children with asthma and their parents
showed that the desired outcomes of increased
child involvement in care, improved management of
asthma attacks, and reduced use of emergency
rooms improved significantly among families in
which fathers participated in the parents’ educational sessions (Lewis et al., 1984). Increased communication among families with epilepsy appears to
be equally important, given the risks that children
with seizure disorders face as adults, but that cultural variations in parenting roles among males may
require special attention.
Evidence suggests that the suicide rate of adults
with epilepsy is higher than that of the general population (Matthews and Barabas, 1981). Other data
suggests that the origins of adult health behaviors
originate in childhood (Mechanic, 1979; Lewis et
al., 1984; Lewis and Lewis, 19Sq). Because of the
importance of the family environment in nurturing
healthy children (Caplan, 1955; Brofenbrenner,
1979), it is imperative that preventive family mental
health services be available to parents of children
with epilepsy. A review of the medical literature
indicates that physicians acknowledge the effects of
seizure disorders on a child’s physical health but
are less knowledgeable about the magnitude of the
social, psychological, and economic disruptions affecting the child and the family.
The family-focused educational program in this
study reduced the anxiety of parents and improved
their knowledge about seizures. In contrast, the traditional educational program primarily improved
parental knowledge. Because of the magnitude of
suffering among parents and children with seizure
disorders as well as the potential to reduce behavioral problems and prevent future mental health disabilities, it is time for federal and voluntary agencies to promote comprehensive, child-centered,
family-focused health care programs for children
with epilepsy and their families.
Acknowledgment: We thank the parents, teachers, and
physicians in Los Angeles, CA and Santiago, Chile who
helped in the pilot study and in evaluating this program.
In particular, we thank the members of the Board of the
Liga Contra Epilepsia and their staff. We also are indebted to Drs. Antonio Delgado-Escueta and Donald
Shields, who assisted in development of the pilot study,
and to Dr. James Cereghino and Pamela McGarvey, who
facilitated the international arrangements for the Randomized Trial.
This work was supported by U.S. Public Health Service Grant No. PHS N01-NS-0-2332. Funds for the data
analysis were made available by the William T. Grant
Foundation, New York, NY and the School of Nursing at
the University of California, Los Angeles.
REFERENCES
Austin JK, McDermott N. Parental attirude and coping, behaviors in families of children with epilepsy. J Neurosci Nurs
1988;20: 174-9.
Brofenbrenner U. The ecology of human development experiments by nature and design. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Brooks MB, Beal LL, Ogg HL, Blakeslee B. The child with
deformed or missing limbs, his problems and prostheses. Am
J Nurs 1962;62:88-92.
Caplan G. Emotional problems of early childhood. New York:
Basic Books, 1955.
Devellis RF, Devellis B, et al. Epilepsy and learned helplessness. Basic Appl SOC Psycho1 1988;1:241-53.
Engel GL. Grief and grieving. Am J Nurs 1964;64:93-8.
Ferrari M, Matthews WS, Barabas G. The family and the child
with epilepsy. Fam Process 1983;22:53-9.
Goldin CJ, Margolin RJ. The psychosocial aspects of epilepsy.
In: Wright GN, ed, Epilepsy rehabilitation. Boston: Little
Brown, 1975:6&80.
Gregoriades AD. A medical and social survey of 231 children
with seizures. Epilepsia 1972;13:13-20.
Hughes JG, Jablow JT. The treatment of the epileptic child. J
Pediatr 1958;53:66-8.
Epilepsiu, Vol. 32, No. 3, 1991 
374 M. A. LEWIS ET AL.
Janis IL, ed. Counseling on personal decisions: theory and research on helping relationships. New Haven, CN: Yale University Press, 1982.
Janis IJ, Mann L. Decisionmaking: a psychological analysis of
conflict, choice, and commitment. New York: The Free
Press: a division of Macmillan, 1977.
Kallaus J. The child with cleft lip and palate. Am J Nurs
1965;65:12&2.
Kleck R. Self disclosure patterns of the non-obviously stigmatized. Psychol Rep 1968;23: 123948.
Lewis CE, Lewis MA. The educational outcomes and illness
behaviors of participants of a child initiated care system-a
12-year follow-up. Pediatrics 1989;84:845-50.
Lewis CE, Rachelefsky G, et al. A randomized trial of ACT
(asthma care training) for kids. Pediatrics 1984;74:478-86.
Lewis MA, de la Sota A, Rachelefsky G, Lewis CE, Quinones
H, Richards W. Act-asthma control y tratamiento para ninds: a progress report. Health Educ Q 1987;14:281-90.
Lewis MA, Salas I, de la Sota A, Chiofalo N, Leal-Sotelo M. A
randomized trial of a program to enhance the competencies of
children with epilepsy. Epilepsia 1990;31: 101-9.
Long CL, Moore JR. Parental expectations for their epileptic
children. J Child Psychol Psychaitry 1979;20:299-312.
Matthews WS, Barabas G. Suicide and epilepsy: a review of the
literature. Psychosomatics 1981 ;22:515-24.
McGrath AP. The epileptic child and his family. Spec Educ
1972;61:234.
McLenahan IG. Helping the mother who has no baby to take
home. Am J Nurs 1962;62:7&1.
Mechanic D. The stability of health and illness behavior: results
from a 16-year follow-up. Am J Public Health 1979;69:
Rogers CR. Client-centered therapy: a helping process. Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press, 1951.
Shope JT. Intervention to improve “compliance with pediatric
anticonvulsant therapy.” Patient Counseling Health Educ
1980;2:135-41.
Slimmer LW. Helping parents cope with their child’s seizure
disorder. J Public Nurs Ment Health Serv 1979;30:33.
Smilkstein G. The family Apgar: a proposal for a family function
test and its use by physicians. J Fam Pract 1978;6:1231-9.
Tavriger R. Some parental theories about the causes of epilepsy.
Epilepsia 1966;7:33940.
Taylor JA. A personality scale of manifest anxiety. J Abnorm
Psychol 1953;48:285-90.
Ward F, Bower BD. A study of certain social aspects of epilepsy
in childhood. Dev Med Child Neurol 1978;2O(suppl 39): 1-63.
1142-5.
I&SUME
Une Ctude randomisee et contr6lbe a ete menee a Santiago
(Chili), afin d’tvaluer I’efficacite d’un programme d’kducation
pour I’tpilepsie de I’enfant: il s’agit d’une intervention centrCe
sur l’enfant, en milieu familial, qui a ete mise au point et testee
a Los Angeles (U.S.A.) selon un modele de conseils aux parents
d’enfants Cpleptiques. Ce programme avait pour but: (1) de
traiter les sentiments de colere, ressentiment, et tristesse lies ila
perte d’un enfant normal; (2) augmenter les connaissances surles
soins a apporter a l’enfant; (3) reduire l’anxietk like a I’tpilepsie
de leur enfant; (4) amCliorer leur formation et leur conduite. Tous
les parents ont Cte kvalues de faCon prkliminaire puis rC-kvalu6s
5 mois aprks les interventions Cducatives. Les parents du group
experimental (n = 185) et leurs enfants ont assiste separementa
4 sessions d’l heure 1/2, puis se rencontraient a la fin de chaque
session pour partager leur experience d’apprentissage. Un
groupe contr6le de parents (n = 180) et leurs enfants ont assist6
ensemble a 3 sessions comprenant des cours de 2 heures suivis
par des sessions de questions et reponses. Bien que la connaissance globale de I’epilepsie chez les parents ail ete relativement
importante des le depart, elle a Cte considerablement amCliorCe
dans le groupe experimental comme dans le groupe contrdle. En ce qui concerne I’anxiCte, I’evaluation a 5 mois a montrt que les
parents du groupe experimental, en particulier les meres, signalaient plus souvent que les parents du groupe contrdle qu’ils
Ctaient moins anxieux (p < 0.001); leur anxiett, mesurCe par
I’Cchelle d’Anxiete Manifeste de Taylor, etait significativement
moindre (p < 0.01).
(P. Genton, Marseille)
ZUSAMMENFASSUNG
Eine randomisierte, kontrollierte Studie wurde in Santiago,
Chile durchgefiihrt, urn die Wirkung eines Kinder-EpilepsieProgramms zu testen: dabei handelt es sich um ein in Los Angeles, Kalifornien entwickeltes und pilotgetestetes Modell zur kind und familiengerechten Intervention, entsprechend einem
Beratungsmodell fur Eltern von Kindern mit Anfallen. Ziel war
es, den Eltern zu helfen: (1) im Umgang mit ihren Angsten, Resentiments und Kummer durch den Verlust eines normalen
Kindes (2) ihr Wissen iiber die Betreuung ihres Kindes zu vergroRern (3) ihre Angst zu verringern, ein Kind mit einem
Anfallsleiden zu haben (4) ihre Entscheidungsfahigkeit zu verstarken. Samtliche Eltern wurden vorgetestet und 5 Monate
spater, nach der Unterweisung nachgetestet. In der Testgruppe
(n = 185) besuchten die Eltern und ihre Kinder getrennt 4 11/2
Stunden Seminare, um sich nach jeder Sitzung noch gemeinsam
zur Vertiefung des Gelernten zu treffen. In einer Vergleichgruppe (n = 180) besuchten Eltern und Kinder 3 2-
Stunden-Vorlesungen, gefolgt von einer Frage- und Antwortstunde. Obwohl bei allen Eltern das Wissen ziemlich gut war,
verbesserte es sich jedoch betrachtlich in beiden Gruppen. Beziiglich der Angst waren nach 5 Monaten die Eltern, besonders
die Mutter der Testgruppe in der Lage zu sagen, sie seien weniger angstlich als die der Kontrollgruppe (p = 0.001); gemessen
an der Taylor-Angst-Skala war ihre Angst signifikant verringert
(p = 0.01).
(C. G. Lipinski, HeidelberglNeckargemund)
Epilepsia, Vol. 32. No. 3, 1991 