ENDOMETRIOSIS
Low-dose oral contraceptive pill for dysmenorrhea
associated with endometriosis: a placebo-controlled,
double-blind, randomized trial
Tasuku Harada, M.D.,a Mikio Momoeda, M.D.,b Yuji Taketani, MD.,b Hiroshi Hoshiai, M.D.,c
and Naoki Terakawa, M.D.a
a Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tottori University School of Medicine, Yonago, Japan; b Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, Tokyo University, Tokyo, Japan; and c Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kinki University, Osaka,
Japan
Objective: To evaluate the efficacy of a low-dose oral contraceptive pill (OCP) for patients with dysmenorrhea
associated with endometriosis.
Design: A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial.
Settings: Clinical trial sites in Japan.
Patient(s): One hundred patients with dysmenorrhea associated with endometriosis. Most enrolled patients had
radiologic evidence of endometriosis rather than surgical diagnosis.
Intervention(s): Patients were randomly assigned to receive either monophasic OCP (ethinylestradiol plus norethisterone) or placebo. Participants used their usual pain medications as needed during the trial.
Main Outcome Measure(s): After four cyclic treatments, we used a zero- to three-point verbal rating scale and
a visual analogue scale to measure the severity of disability because of dysmenorrhea in daily life, and the patients’
use of analgesics.
Result(s): Total dysmenorrhea scores assessed by the verbal rating scale were significantly decreased at the end of
treatment in both groups. From the first cycle through the end of treatment, dysmenorrhea in the OCP group was
significantly milder than in the placebo group. Nonmenstrual pelvic pain was present at baseline in 24.5% (12 of
49) of the OCP group and 34.0% (16 of 47) of the placebo group. The volume of endometrioma (larger than 3 cm in
diameter) was significantly decreased in the OCP group, but not in the placebo group. No serious adverse events
related to using OCPs occurred.
Conclusion(s): The present study clearly demonstrated for the first time that OCPs could be used to effectively and
safely treat pain associated with endometriosis. (Fertil Steril 2008;90:1583–8. 2008 by American Society for
Reproductive Medicine.)
Key Words: Oral contraceptive (OC), ethinylestradiol, norethisterone, randomized clinical trial
Endometriosis, a chronic gynecologic disease, is characterized by the presence and growth of endometrial-like glands
and stromas outside the uterine cavity. Endometriosis causes
dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, pelvic pain, and infertility in
reproductive-age women. Dysmenorrhea is the most common
symptom in patients with endometriosis. Ovulation inhibition is known to relieve dysmenorrhea, and oral contraceptive
pills (OCPs) that contain synthetic estrogen and progestin can
be used for this purpose (1). Oral contraceptive pills suppress
ovulation and reduce the growth of endometrial tissue, thus
reducing both menstrual flow and prostaglandins production
(2). Recently, OCPs were also shown to down-regulate cell
proliferation and increase apoptosis in the eutopic endometrium of women with endometriosis (3).
Oral contraceptive pills, which have been used empirically
to alleviate dysmenorrhea for many years, are generally well
tolerated, with fewer metabolic and hormonal side effects
than danazol or gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist
(GnRHa). Open clinical trials have shown that OCPs relieve
dysmenorrhea. The Cochrane Database describes a few randomized clinical trials conducted from 1960 to 1970. Proctor
et al. (4) revealed that OCPs with medium-dose estrogen and
first- and second-generation progestogens were more effective than placebos for dysmenorrhea, but four classic randomized clinical trials used a small number of patients and
are of poor quality. In those studies, most of the study subjects
were women with primary dysmenorrhea, but no endometriosis. Although OCPs for dysmenorrhea associated with endometriosis have been the first choice of treatments in the
Received May 16, 2007; revised and accepted August 21, 2007.
All authors have received consulting fee from Nobelpharma Co., Ltd.
Tokyo, Japan.
Reprint requests to: Tasuku Harada, M.D., Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Tottori University School of Medicine, Yonago 683-8504,
Japan (FAX: 81 859 38 6649; E-mail: tasuku@grape.med.tottori-u.ac.jp).
0015-0282/08/$34.00 Fertility and Sterility Vol. 90, No. 5, November 2008 1583
doi:10.1016/j.fertnstert.2007.08.051 Copyright ª2008 American Society for Reproductive Medicine, Published by Elsevier Inc.
current medical management of endometriosis (1, 5), no
high-quality clinical evidence is available regarding the efficacy of low-dose OCP. Therefore, we undertook a randomized, placebo-controlled, clinical trial to examine the
efficacy of low-dose OCP on dysmenorrhea associated with
endometriosis.
METHODS
Patient Selection
Patient inclusion criteria included women of 18 years and
older; regular menstrual cycles (28  2 days); symptomatic endometriosis (diagnosed by laparoscopy orlaparotomy) or ovarian endometrioma (diagnosed by ultrasound or magnetic
resonance imaging); normal cervical and endometrial smear
cytology; moderate or severe dysmenorrhea (evaluated by
a modified pain scale) and no medical or surgical treatment
for endometriosis within 8 weeks before entry into the study,
including hormonal agents, such as OCP, GnRHa, and danazol.
The study patients must have had moderate or severe dysmenorrhea, scoring higher than three points at the admission
visit on a modified pain scale originally developed by Biberoglu et al. (6) and Andersch et al. (7). This verbal rating scale
(VRS) defines pain according to a limited ability to work and
the need for analgesics, categorized by the number of days
analgesics were used (Table 1). The degree of dysmenorrhea
and nonmenstrual pelvic pain was also evaluated according to
a visual analogue scale (VAS).
Study Design
This was a phase III, randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled, multicenter trial of low-dose OCP versus placebo
in 100 patients with endometriosis performed in 18 centers
(13 clinics, 5 hospitals) in Japan. Subjects were randomly
assigned in a ratio of 1:1 to receive monophasic OCP (ethinylestradiol 0.035 mg plus norethisterone 1 mg) for 21 days,
plus 7 days of placebo or identical placebo for 28 days.
The OCP and the placebo were prepared by the manufacturer
in 28-day blister packs and appeared identical. The use of analgesic agents was allowed, but other hormonal treatments
for pain or vaginal bleeding were prohibited. Randomization
was done by the pharmaceutical company (Nobelpharma
Co., Ltd. Tokyo, Japan), using the permuted block method.
One block, consisting of six sets of drugs (three active
drug, three placebo), was allocated to each of the 18 centers.
Allocation concealment was accomplished centrally by the
company, not broken until after all data were collected.
Both the patients and the doctors were blinded regarding
the medication. Treatment began on the third day (2
days) of the menstrual cycle and continued for four cycles.
This study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and the Japanese Pharmaceutical Affairs
Law. The investigators obtained approval for the protocol
from their institutional review boards, and each patient provided written informed consent.
Patient Monitoring
During the two menstrual cycles before starting the study
protocol, each patient underwent a prerecruitment evaluation,
consisting of a general medical and gynecologic history,
physical and pelvic examination, clinical evaluation of signs
and symptoms, cervical and endometrial smear, patient evaluation of pain, and review of the menstrual record, that is,
scoring dysmenorrhea and nonmenstrual pain and recording
details about the use of analgesics. Blood was drawn for pretreatment clinical laboratory determinations, including hematology (white blood cells, platelet, red blood cells,
hemoglobin, and hematocrit), coagulation tests (fibrinogen,
plasminogen, PT, APTT, and AT-III), biochemical test (total
protein, albumin, GOT, GPT, r-GTP, Al-P, LDH, total bilirubin, total cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol,
TG, Creatinine, Ca, Fe, P, Na, K, and Cl), antiphospholipid
antibodies, CA125, and serum IL-6. At this point, eligibility
for entry into the study was determined, pain assessed, and
the drug provided. Patients were followed every 4 weeks
and their diaries reviewed to evaluate pain and bleeding,
side effects, and other health concerns. Efficacy was evaluated
at the final visit after completing treatment. Symptoms were
assessed using the modified pain scale (Table 1).
The primary efficacy endpoint was patient response to
treatment for dysmenorrhea associated with endometriosis,
as evaluated by VRS. Secondary efficacy endpoints included
changes in the VAS of dysmenorrhea, VRS, and VAS in nonmenstrual pain, clinical evaluation of pelvic induration, and
size of ovarian endometrioma.
Statistical Analysis
A minimum of 40 patients per treatment arm was required for
the trial to ensure that this trial would have a power of 80% to
TABLE 1
Grading and scoring of symptoms and
requirement of analgesics.
Grade Score
Dysmenorrhea (or nonmenstrual pelvic pain)
None 0 none
Mild 1 some loss of work (or study)
efficiency
Moderate 2 want to take some rest in
bed, loss of work
Severe 3 in bed more than 1 day
Use of analgesics (previous or present period)
None 0 none
Mild 1 take analgesics for 1 day
Moderate 2 take analgesics for 2 days
Severe 3 take analgesics for >3 days
Note: Grading scales developed by Biberoglu et al. and
Andersch et al. were modified.
Harada. OCP for dysmenorrhea with endometriosis. Fertil Steril 2008.
1584 Harada et al. OCP for dysmenorrhea with endometriosis Vol. 90, No. 5, November 2008
detect 1.2-point differences in mean change in the dysmenorrhea score between the OCP group and the placebo group. The
estimated difference between the groups was calculated from
our pilot study and from reported data on placebo (8). Assuming a dropout rate during treatment of 10%, we tried to recruit
50 patients per group. The mean changes of the dysmenorrhea
score from baseline at the final evaluation were tested, using
the Student t test or Wilcoxon-2 sample test. Repeated-measured analysis using a mixed model was performed to evaluate
the effect of treatment. Statistical significance was accepted at
P<.05. The intent-to-treat population included patients who
received at least one cycle of study medication.
RESULTS
Disposition of Patients
Of 107 patients entered in the study, 7 were excluded before
randomization because they had abnormal smear cytology (n
¼ 3), exclusion criteria (n ¼ 3), or positive antiphospholipid
antibodies (n ¼ 1). One hundred patients were randomized to
receive either OCP (n ¼ 51) or placebo (n ¼ 49). One patient
in the OCP group did not take OCPs because she became
pregnant after randomization. One patient in the OCP and
two in the placebo group were lost to follow-up. Therefore,
96 patients were included in at least one of the efficacy analyses. A patient flow chart is presented in Figure 1.
Fourteen patients (seven OCP, seven placebo) discontinued
the study. Four of the OCP patients were discontinued because of adverse effects (one, rupture of ovarian cyst; one,
nausea and headache; one, ovarian hemorrhagic cyst; one,
edema), two patients were lost to follow-up, and one took
a prohibited drug. Seven of the placebo patients terminated:
three had adverse effects (one, edema and headache; one,
ovarian hemorrhagic cyst; one, worsened dysmenorrhea),
three were lost to follow-up, and one used a prohibited
drug. Continuation rates were similar between the treatment
groups, with 88% of patients receiving OCPs and 86%
receiving placebo continuing in the study.
Patient Characteristics
The two treatment groups were similar with respect to pretreatment and demographic characteristics (Table 2). Most
patients (47 of 49 in the OCP group and 44 of 47 patients
in the placebo group) had endometrioma.
Changes in Pain Score
The mean scores before and after treatment in the dysmenorrhea and nonmenstrual pain evaluation are shown in Table 2.
Treatment groups did not differ significantly for any of the primary variables (dysmenorrhea and nonmenstrual pain scores)
at the start of treatment. Total dysmenorrhea scores assessed
by VRS (dysmenorrhea pain plus drug score) significantly decreased at the end of treatment in both the OCP and placebo
groups. However, the reduction in pain score was significantly
higher in the OCP group (2.0) compared with the placebo
group (0.6) (P<.0001). The mean dysmenorrhea VAS
scores were also significantly lower in both groups after treatment. Again, reduction of the dysmenorrhea score in the OCP
group was significantly greater than in the placebo group.
The total dysmenorrhea score was significantly reduced
when evaluating the first treatment cycle. Dysmenorrhea (total score) in the OCP group became significantly milder than
that of the placebo group from the first visit to the end of treatment (Fig. 2). The dysmenorrhea pain score was also reduced
at the first visit through the end of treatment. The dysmenorrhea drug score decreased at the end of second cycle through
final evaluation (data not shown).
Nonmenstrual pelvic pain was present at baseline in 24.5%
(12 of 49) ofthe OCP group and 34.0% (16 of 47) ofthe placebo
group. Total nonmenstrual pelvic pain scores by VRS were not
significantly reduced after treatment in either the OCP or
placebo groups. The nonmenstrual pelvic pain VAS score
was significantly reduced only in the OCP group (Table 2).
Clinical Evaluation of Pelvic Induration
Pelvic induration was identified at the baseline examination
in 32 of 49 OCP patients and 33 of 47 placebo patients. At
the final visit, OCP patients showed less induration (21 of
49) than the placebo group (14 of 47). The difference was
not significant.
Ovarian Endometrioma
Ovarian endometrioma had a high prevalence rate at baseline
(Table 2). The volume of the endometrioma was significantly
reduced at the end of treatment in both the OCP and placebo
groups (Table 2). When ovarian endometriomas larger than 3
cm in diameter were analyzed, the volume of the
FIGURE 1
A flow-chart of participants through the trial. OCP:
oral contraceptive pill.
Harada. OCP for dysmenorrhea with endometriosis. Fertil Steril 2008.
Fertility and Sterility 1585
endometrioma was significantly reduced only in the OCP
group (P<.01, data not shown).
Side Effects
No serious adverse events related to OCP use occurred. However, the incidence of irregular uterine bleeding and nausea
was significantly higher in the OCP group than in the placebo
group (60.0% vs. 26.5%, 24.0% vs. 0.0%, respectively).
No clinically relevant changes in hematology and chemistry assay were noted.
DISCUSSION
Oral contraceptive pills have been used as a first-choice drug
for primary dysmenorrhea and dysmenorrhea associated with
endometriosis (1, 5). However, clinical evidence supporting
the efficacy of low-dose OCP is lacking. This multicenter,
double-blind, placebo-controlled, clinical trial evaluated the
efficacy of low-dose OCP for dysmenorrhea associated
with endometriosis. Our results demonstrated for the first
time that low-dose OCPs effectively reduced dysmenorrhea
associated with endometriosis compared with placebo.
OCPs lessened dysmenorrhea and reduced the number of
days analgesics were used, suggesting that OCPs improved
quality of life in endometriosis patients. No serious adverse
events related to OCPs use were observed. Our results support the common clinical practice of treating dysmenorrhea
resulting from endometriosis with low-dose OCP.
A meta-analysis by The Cochrane Collaboration suggested
that OCPs may be more effective than placebo, but the investigators pointed out that the studies included in the meta-analysis were conducted >20 years ago using high-dose OCPs.
Recent studies have demonstrated the efficacy of various
TABLE 2
Demographic data of patients and effects of treatment on pain score and endometrioma size.
Oral contraceptive
(n [ 49)
Placebo
(n [ 47) P value
Age (y) 31.7  5.6 31.5  6.3 .867
Age of menarche (y) 12.1  1.5 12.1  1.3 .9271
Cycle length (days) 28.4  1.4 28.4  1.2 .9241
Previous pregnancy 16 14 .7632
Median parity (range) 0 (0–4) 0 (0–3)
Surgical diagnosis 10 7
Presence of
Endometriomaa 47 44 .6138
Adenomyosis 7 7
Dysmenorrhea score
VRS
Pretreatment 4.4  1.1 4.3  1.0
End of treatment 2.4  1.4 P<.0001 3.7  1.3 P¼.0047 <.0001
VAS
Pretreatment 58.7  18.6 55.8  17.5
End of treatment 27.6  21.6 P<.0001 46.2  24.2 P¼.0064 <.0001
Nonmenstrual pelvic pain score
VRS
Pretreatment 1.6  1.5 1.1  1.1
End of treatment 1.3  1.5 P¼.0993 1.2  1.4 P¼.5583 .1371
VAS
Pretreatment 27.5  25.1 22.8  24.5
End of treatment 19.1  22.9 P¼.0339 21.0  26.0 P¼.6783 .2560
Volume of endometrioma (median, mL)
Pretreatment 14.7 14.6
End of treatment 7.6 P<.0001 9.9 P¼.0172 .0378
Average diameter of endometrioma (mean, mm)
Pretreatment 30.0  12.7 30.4  14.3
End of treatment 25.3  16.2 P<.0001 27.3  17.9 P¼.0023 .040
Note: Values are mean  SD. a Endometrioma was diagnosed by ultrasound examination or magnetic resonance imaging.
Harada. OCP for dysmenorrhea with endometriosis. Fertil Steril 2008.
1586 Harada et al. OCP for dysmenorrhea with endometriosis Vol. 90, No. 5, November 2008
combinations of low-dose OCPs as a treatment choice for primary dysmenorrhea (9, 10).
Endometriosis is often manifested by pain symptoms, such
as dysmenorrhea, pelvic pain, and dyspareunia. Current therapeutic options include conservative surgery and medical
management with GnRH agonist, danazol, and progestins.
Medical treatment of endometriosis-associated pain is generally effective, with little difference in efficacy observed
among the different types of agents used; however, the adverse-event profiles of the various drug regimens can differ
markedly. GnRH agonists are the most frequently used current medical treatment for endometriosis. Although the effectiveness of GnRH agonists is well established, the side effects
include hot flushes, vaginal dryness, emotional lability, and
loss of libido. Administration of GnRH agonist also results
in a 3% to 5% loss in bone mineral density, and this decrease
may not be reversed until a few years after completion of
treatments (1, 2). The OCP is the most widely used hormonal
drug in the world. Although some minor adverse events have
been reported, all symptoms are well tolerated and much
safer than other hormonal agents.
Vercellini et al. (8) evaluated the use of a combination OCP
(ethinylestradiol and desogestrel) compared with monthly
subcutaneous injections of GnRH agonist in reducing dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, and nonmenstrual pain in the
presence of a laparoscopically confirmed diagnosis of endometriosis. Of the 57 patients evaluated, no significant differences between the two treatments for any of the three
symptoms evaluated were found at the end of the 6-month
follow-up. Another small, prospective, randomized study
reported on the postoperative administration of 6 months of
cyclic low-dose OCP containing ethinylestradiol and gestodene compared with no treatment. The results indicated that
OCP therapy after operative laparoscopy did not significantly
influence long-term recurrence rates for symptoms or endometrioma, although it showed a significant trend toward a delay in disease recurrence (11). Recently, Zupi et al. (12)
conducted a controlled study to assess whether GnRH agonist
plus add-back therapy allows longer treatment and is associated with better pain control and quality of life than GnRH analogue alone or OCP. The results showed that 12 months of
GnRH agonist plus add-back, GnRH analogue alone, and
OCP significantly reduced pelvic pain, dysmenorrhea, and
the dyspareunia score. They concluded that add-back therapy
allows for safe and comfortable treatment over a long period
for women with relapsed endometriosis-associated pain.
A major challenge in managing endometriosis is that of
chronic or recurrent symptoms that require long-term or
repeated courses of medication. Treatment with GnRH analogues, such as leuprolide, is limited to only 6 months because
these agents induce a hypoestrogenic state that substantially
decreases bone mineral density. The OCP as a first choice is
a simple and effective way to manage endometriosis. Vercellini
et al. (13) reported that avoidance or delaying of menstruation
by continuous OCP administration for 2 years significantly
reduced the severity of dysmenorrhea in women who experienced recurrent dysmenorrhea despite cyclic OCP use.
By preventing ovulation, OCPs suppress the progesteronedriven proliferation of the secretory endometrium during the
luteal phase, thus resulting in a decrease in prostaglandin synthesis and the volume of menstrual fluid (2). The most widely
accepted theory of the pathogenesis of endometriosis proposes that endometrial tissue reaches the pelvic cavity
through retrograde menstruation. Epidemiologic data suggest
that potential risk factors for developing endometriosis include shorter menstrual cycles, longer duration of menstrual
flow, outflow obstruction, and younger age at menarche (14,
15). Collectively, OCPs that decrease menstrual flow may influence the development of endometriosis. Although the
literature is in conflict as to how OCPs affect the risk of
endometriosis (16), the currently used low-dose OCPs,
although not curative, appear beneficial because they may
suppress endometriosis. Recent experimental data show
that OCPs also down-regulate cell proliferation and increase
apoptosis in the eutopic endometrium of women with endometriosis (3).
In conclusion, the present study demonstrated that lowdose OCPs are an effective treatment with few adverse effects
for dysmenorrhea associated with endometriosis.
Acknowledgments: The authors thank the following doctors for participation
of the study: Dr. Kazue Yoshino (Yoshino Women’s Clinic), Dr. Toyohiko
Miyazaki (Akasakamitsuke Miyazaki Clinic), Dr. Takayuki Kamiya (Shinagawa Ladies’ Clinic Kamiya), Dr. Tsuneo Yokokura (Yokokura Clinic), Dr.
Shigeaki Kurasawa (Ginza Women’s Clinic), Dr. Masaru Sakamoto (Sasaki
Foundation Kyoundo Hospital), Dr. Ken Yoshikawa (Kichijyoji Ladies
Clinic), Dr. Hiroshi Sakuma (Kumagaya General Hospital), Dr. Fumio
Sone (Takatsu Central Hospital), Dr. Kiyoko Iesaka (Iesaka Obstetrics and
Gynecological Clinic), Dr. Kazunori Kinoshita (Seijo Kinoshita Hospital),
Dr. Mitsuma Shimadu (Medical Corporation Daiyukai Daiyukai Daiichi
Hospital), Dr. Susumu Namihira (Namihira Ladies Clinic), Dr. Hitoshi Ohkubo (Sapporo Maternity Women’s Hospital), Dr. Minoru Yaegashi (Sapporo
Maternity Women’s S-1 Clinic), Dr. Masaki Hashimoto (Hashimoto Clinic),
FIGURE 2
Changes in mean dysmenorrhea score during the
trial. OCP: oral contraceptive pill.
Harada. OCP for dysmenorrhea with endometriosis. Fertil Steril 2008.
Fertility and Sterility 1587
Dr. Teruko Yasuda (Yoshio Clinic), and Dr. Shinichi Tanaka (Primo Women’s
Clinic).
REFERENCES
1. Olive DL, Pritts EA. Treatment of endometriosis. N Engl J Med
2001;345:266–75.
2. Crosignani P, Olive D, Bergvist A, Luciano A. Advances in the management of endometriosis: an update for clinicians. Hum Reprod Update
2006;12:179–89.
3. Meresman GF, Auge L, Baranao RI, Lombardi E, Tesone M, Sueldo C.
Oral contraceptives suppress cell proliferation and enhance apoptosis of
eutopic endometrial tissue from patients with endometriosis. Fertil Steril
2002;77:1141–7.
4. Proctor ML, Roberts H, Farquhar CM. Combined oral contraceptive pill
(OCP) as treatment for primary dysmenorrhea. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 2001;CD002120.
5. Cecil Text Book of Medicine. 22nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier,
2004:1500.
6. Biberoglu KO, Behrman SJ. Dosage aspects of danazol therapy in endometriosis: short-term and long-term effectiveness. Am J Obstet Gynecol
1981;139:645.
7. Andersch B, Milson I. An epidemiologic study of young women with
dysmenorrhea. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1982;144:655–60.
8. Vercellini P, Trespide L, Colombo A, Ventola N, Marchini M,
Crosignani PG. A gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist versus
a low-dose oral contraceptive for pelvic pain associated with endometriosis. Fertil Steril 1993;60:75–9.
9. Hendlix SL, Alexander NJ. Primary dysmenorrhea treatment with a
desogestrel-containing low-dose oral contraceptive. Contraception 2002;
66:393–9.
10. Davis AR, Westhoff C, O’Connell K, Gallagher N. Oral contraceptive
for dysmenorrhea in adolescent girls. Obstet Gynecol 2005;106:
97–104.
11. Muzzi L, Marana R, Caruana P, Catalano GF, Marugutti F, Panici PB.
Postoperative administration of monphasic combined oral contraceptives
after laparoscopic treatment of ovarian endometriomas: a prospective
randomized trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2000;183:588–92.
12. Zupi E, Marconi D, Sbracia M, Zullo F, Vivo BD, Exacustos C,
Sorrenti G. Add-back therapy in the treatment of endometriosis-associated pain. Fertil Steril 2004;82:1303–8.
13. Vercellini P, Frontino G, Giorgi OD, Pietropaolo G, Pasin R,
Crosignani PG. Continuous use of oral contraceptive for endometriosis-associated recurrent dysmenorrheal that does not respond to a cyclic
pill regimen. Fertil Steril 2003;80:560–3.
14. Apgar BS. Endometriosis. Diagnostic clues and new treatment options.
Postgrad Med 1992;92:283–90.
15. Barbieri RL. Etiology and epidemiology of endometriosis. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 1990;162:565–7.
16. Vercellini P, Rangni G, Trespidi L, Oldani S, Crosignani PG. Does contraception modify the risk of endometriosis? Hum Reprod 1993;8:
547–51.
1588 Harada et al. OCP for dysmenorrhea with endometriosis Vol. 90, No. 5, November 2008