Effect of Penicillin and Aureomycin on
the Natural Course of Streptococcal
Tonsillitis and P haryngi tis *
CAPT. WILLIAM R. BRINK, M.c., CHARLES H. RAMMELKAMP, JR., M.D.,
CAPT. FLOYD W. DENNY, M.C. and CAPT. LEWIS W. WANNAMAKER, M.C.
Cleveland, Ohio
HE T problem of determining the
efficacy of therapy of acute streptococcal infections of the upper respiratory tract is difficult for these infections
are of short duration, and are usually not
severe. Only by controlled studies in which
an attempt is made to quantitate the occurrence of symptoms, physical signs and fever
is it possible to conclude that this disease
has been affected favorably. The present
study was undertaken to determine the
relative efficacy of penicillin and aureomycin in the treatment of group A hemolytic streptococcal respiratory infections.
For this purpose 4’75 patients with exudative tonsillitis or pharyngitis were studied
by clinical, bacteriologic and serologic
methods.
DESCRIPTION OF STUDY
The investigation was conducted at Francis E.
Warren Air Force Base, Wyoming, between
March 8 and April 30, 1949. During the period
of study streptococcal respiratory infections
were epidemic with rates of ten to thirteen
hospitalized cases per 1,000 men per week.
All patients admitted to the base hospital with
respiratory symptoms or fever were examined
within a few hours by a physician from the
Streptococcal Disease Laboratory. If exudate
of any degree was observed on the tonsils or
pharyngeal mucosa, the patient was admitted
to the study ward. Selection for the treated and
control groups was determined by the air force
serial number. While penicillin was being evaluated, patients whose serial number ended in an
even digit received intramuscular injections of
procaine penicillin G in peanut oil with 2 per
cent aluminum monostearate. The dosage was
300,000 units on admission, 300,000 units at
forty-eight hours and 600,000 units at ninety-six
hours. Patients whose serial number ended in
an odd digit served as controls and received no
treatment.
One week after concluding the study of penicillin aureomycint therapy was employed. Patients with serial numbers ending in the digits
one and three were given no specific treatment.
All other patients with exudative tonsillitis and
pharyngitis received 1 gm. of aureomycin immediately, then 0.5 gm. every four hours for
twenty-four hours and 0.25 gm. every four
hours for the next three days. Total dosage was
8.5 gm. in four days.
While in the hospital the patients received no
antipyretics but were given small doses of codeine for severe headache. Oral temperatures were
taken every four hours. A culture of the pharynx,
total leukocyte count and a blood specimen were
obtained on admission. The throat cultures were
repeated on the second and third hospita1 days.
Leukocyte counts were repeated on the second
hospital day. During aureomycin therapy leukocyte counts were also done on the third day and
cultures were taken at the time of discharge from
the hospital. Three to four weeks after admission
to the hospital the patients were examined for
t Supplied by Lederle Laboratories, Inc., Pearl River,
N. Y.
* From the Streptococcal Disease Laboratory, Francis E. Warren Air Force Base, Wyoming, and the Department
of Preventive Medicine, Western Reserve University, School of Medicine, Cleveland, 0. This investigation was supported through the Commission on Acute Respiratory Diseases, Armed Forces Epidemiological Board, Office of The
Surgeon GeneraI, Washington, D. C.
300 AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDIClNE 
Effect of Antibiotics on Streptococcal Tonsillitis-Brink et al. 30’
poststreptococcal complications, and a culture of
the throat and a blood specimen were obtained.
The clinical observations were made by two
individuals so that comparability of recording
could be maintained. All treatment was administered without the knowledge of the
physicians studying the cases. The occurrence
of symptoms (chilliness, feverishness, headache,
malaise, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, chest pain,
earache, sneezing, nasal obstruction or discharge, epistaxis, dry and sore throat, hoarseness, cough and skin rash) was recorded by
twelve-hour periods for the first forty-eight hours
and daily thereafter. Physical signs were recorded daily. Symptoms were graded as being
absent, present or severe; physical signs were
graded as absent, present or marked. In each
instance the exact time of onset of the disease
was noted.
Cultures of the pharynx were streaked on agar
plates containing horse blood within approximately one hour after collection. After twentyfour hours’ incubation at 37’~. the plates were
examined and colonies exhibiting beta-hemolysis were transferred to agar plates containing
sheep blood for confirmation. Identification of
the serologic group was made by the method of
Maxted;’ typing was performed by the technic of
Swift, Wilson and Lancefield. Antistreptolysin
“0” titers were determined on acute and convalescent sera by a modification of the Swift and
Hodge technic. a
RESULTS
Patients admitted to the hospital with
exudative lesions of the tonsils or oropharynx
were placed in treated or control groups according to their air force serial number.
There was a total of 198 patients who received no treatment; 197 received penicillin
and 80 were treated with aureomycin.
The clinical and laboratory data indicate
that the majority of the infections were
caused by group A streptococci. These organisms were isolated from the cultures of
the throat of 189 of the 198 patients in the
control group. The clinical features and
the elevated leukocyte counts were compatible with the diagnosis of a streptococcal
infection. Finally the fact that an increase of
two dilution increments in the antistreptolysin “0” titer was demonstrated in 82 per
cent of the sera collected from the control
MARCH, 1951
group established the streptococcal etiology
of these infections.
Comparabilip of Treated and Control Groups.
The data were first examined to determine
whether bias occurred in the selection of the
three groups of patients. For this purpose
TABLE I
COMPARABILITY OF THE TREATED AND CONTROL GROUPS
‘I’1 “ratment
I
None
(198
cases)
%
Peni- Aureocillin mycin
(197 (80
, cases) cases)
% / 70
symptoms :
Feverishness *
Headache *
Anorexia *
Sore throat *
Physical signs:
l-
)
-
80
76
76
88
I
74 / 78
79 79
78
81 /
75
91
Tender cervical nodesi
Edema of soft palate t
Scarlet fever.
History of tonsillectomy
Age 17-21.
Laboratory:
76
52
2
29
84
Leukocyte count above 12,OOC
Streptococcus
Type 5................
Type 14..
Type24................
69 79
63 71
1 1
76
29
26
20
2’
2;
I 31
: 39
24 5
/
-
* Present during first 12 hr. of illness.
t Physical signs present during first day of illness.
the three groups were compared with respect to the frequency of certain symptoms
occurring during the first twelve hours of
illness, the presence of abnormal physical
signs on admission and certain laboratory
data. (Table I.) The relative frequency of
feverishness, headache and loss of appetite
was similar in the three groups; sore throat,
however, occurred somewhat less frequently
in those who received penicillin than in the
other two groups. This was also associated
with a decreased incidence of tenderness of
the cervical lymph nodes in the patients who
later received penicillin. There was a distinct difference in the incidence of edema
of the soft palate, the control group exhibiting less swelling of the palate and uvula 
302 Effect of Antibiotics on Streptococcal Tonsillitis--&ink et al.
than the group receiving aureomycin or
penicillin.
There was a difference in the type distribution of the group A streptococci isolated
from the throat cultures in the three groups
of patients. Type 24, which caused 20 and
60
70
60
50
40
30
20
IO
12345 I 2 i 4 5
DAY OF OISEASF DAY OF DISEASE
MALAISE
SORE THROAT
FIG. 1. Effect of penicillin and aureomycin on symp
tams of acute streptococcal tonsillitis and pharyngitis.
24 per cent of the infections in the untreated
patients and those who received penicillin,
respectively, caused only 5 per cent of the
illnesses in those receiving aureomycin. Because of these differences an analysis was
made of the natural course of the illness in
fifty-four patients with type 5 infections,
forty-nine patients with type 14 and thirtyseven cases of type 24 infection in the control group. These tabulations showed that
type 24 streptococci were associated with a
somewhat milder disease than that caused
by the other two types. This may explain
the higher incidence of sore throat, tender
cervical lymph nodes and edema of the soft
palate in those patients who subsequently
received aureomycin. Since a relatively
large number of patients who received no
treatment or penicillin therapy were infected with type 24 streptococci, the patients
in these two groups would tend to recover
more rapidly than those patients receiving
aureomycin.
Efect on Symbtoms and Physical Signs. The
effect of penicillin and aureomycin treatment on selected symptoms is recorded in
Figure 1. The symptoms were tabulated
with reference to the time of onset of the
disease. The first points in each figure indicate the prevalence of the symptom before
institution of therapy. Penicillin or aureomycin treatment resulted in a more rapid
disappearance of symptoms than occurred
in the control group of patients. Aureomycin
was more effective than penicillin although
the differences were not marked. The prevalence of anorexia was about equal in the
three groups throughout the period of observation. Nausea and vomiting were especially prevalent among those patients
receiving aureomycin, 51 per cent having
these complaints. In the untreated group
35 per cent complained of nausea or vomiting during the course of the illness. Loose
stools occurred in 45 per cent of the patients
receiving aureomycin whereas only 15 per
cent of the control group exhibited this
symptom.
Treatment instituted early in the course
of illness resulted in a more rapid recovery
than when therapy was delayed. The effect
of early treatment on the symptom, sore
throat, is shown in Figure 2. Patients treated
with aureomycin within the first twenty-four
hours of onset of illness no longer complained
of sore throat after the fourth day whereas
on the sixth day 8 per cent of the control
group still had this symptom. Penicillin
therapy instituted after the first twenty-four
hours of illness resulted in only a slightly
more rapid disappearance of sore throat
than occurred in those who received no
treatment.
The occurrence of abnormal physical
signs by day of illness in the treated and
control groups is recorded in Figure 3.
Following treatment with either aureomytin or penicillin there was no marked imAMERICAN JOURNAL OP MEDICINE 
Effect of Antibiotics on Streptococcal Tonsillitis-&ink et al. 303
provement in the physical signs. However,
in almost every instance individuals receiving treatment improved somewhat more
rapidly than those serving as controls.
Aureomycin appeared more effective than
penicillin in this regard, but the differences
so
60
&- 70
8
I
+ 60
aw
s:
I 50
k
B
; 40
Y
(r
L 30
20
IO
0
o--o Control
- Penicillin- within 24lw
c-a Penicillin- 24 to 46hr!
&----A Aureomycin -24 to
46 hrs.
DAY OF ILLNESS
PKG. 2. Effect of time of treatment on the occurrence
of the symptom, sore throat.
cannot be considered significant. Early
treatment did not affect the rate of disappearance of abnormal physical signs
appreciably.
Efect on Temperature. Since the course of
the febrile temperature curve is related to
the time of onset of the infection, the patients in the treated and control groups were
divided into three categories: (1) those
whose illness was of less than twenty-four
hours’ duration when first observed, (2)
those who entered the hospital between
twenty-four and forty-eight hours after the
onset of illness and (3) patients whose disease
began more than forty-eight hours before
admission to the hospital.
Both penicillin and aureomycin altered
the oral temperatures and this effect was
most marked when treatment was instituted
MARCH, 1951
during the first twenty-four hours of illness.
(Figs. 4 and 5.) In those patients who were
observed within twenty-four hours of onset
the number of treated patients with fever
over 100”~. decreased within eight to twelve
hours as compared to the control. This dif90
nn
CERVICAL L!fMPH
70
60
50
40
30
20
v)
i IO
A
EXUDATE ON
_ TONSILS
9 70..
K 60-.
g 50..
40-.
30 . .
20 ..
I o-.
t
T
5 5 i
LAY OF DISEASE
EDEMA OF
SOFT PALATE
h A
l \
04 Control
a-* Penicillin
f
I 3 5
DAY OF DISEASE
7
FIG. 3. Effect of therapy on the physical signs associated
with streptococcal sore throat.
ference in the treated and controi groups
was not observed until sixteen to twenty
hours after hospitalization in the patients
who had been ill twenty-four to forty-eight
hours. No conclusion can be made as to the
effect of treatment in the group of patients
observed after forty-eight hours of illness
because of the small numbers involved.
Aureomycin was more effective than
penicillin in lowering the temperature.
This result was consistent in each of the
three groups but is most marked in the
group which was treated during the first
twenty-four hours of illness. For example,
after twenty-eight hours of hospitalization
60 per cent of the control group, 30 per cent
of the penicillin-treated group, and none
of those receiving aureomycin had fever of
over 100%.
Effect oj ‘Treatment on Complications. Suppurative complications were unusual. There 
304 Effect of Antibiotics on Streptococcal Tonsillitis-&ink et al.
were ten (5 per cent) patients with peri- or more after hospitalization. This is in contonsillar cellulitis in the control group, trast to 2 per cent of the patients treated
thirteen (6.5 per cent) in the group receiving with penicillin and 1 per cent of the aureopenicillin and four (5 per cent) in the group mycin-treated group in whom earache
treated with aureomycin. In two of the developed after the institution of treatment.
patients being treated with penicillin peri- There were seven instances of definite
60
70
60
v Control (81 Cases)
e-4 Penicillin (70 Cases)
b----A Aureomycin (33 CCISCS)
0 4 8 I2 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48 52 56 60 6
Hours after Hospitalization
FIG. 4. Effect of therapy instituted during the first twenty-four hours of illness on
the occurrence of fever:
tonsillar cellulitis developed after therapy
was instituted.
Oi 8o (74 CDILI,
5 70 Cd PS”K,ll,” (3, Corer,
(r--d n”rLom)M (33 COrcS,
ti60
5 b 50
>
IEW
S .Z JO
3
2 20
8
b
10
&
4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48 52 56 60 64
Hours after Hospitalization
FIG. 5. Effect of therapy instituted during the
second twenty-four hours of illness on the occurrence of fever.
The number of patients in whom signs of
otitis media developed is not known but
6.5 per cent of the control group complained
of an earache beginning twenty-four hours
acute rheumatic fever developing within
ten to thirty-five days following the acute
streptococcal illness. Five of these patients
were in the control group which received
no treatment and two developed in patients
treated with penicillin. No rheumatic fever
occurred in those patients treated with
aureomycin. No instance of acute nephritis
was observed.
LABORATORY STUDIES
EZect on Total Leukocytes. The average
leukocyte count in the control group and
the groups treated on the first day of illness
is presented in Table II. The total count
decreased more rapidly in the treated
groups than in the control group. Aureomycin therapy appeared to be somewhat
more effective than penicillin in its effect
on the leukocyte count.
Effect of Therapy on Persistence of Group A
Streptococci. The effect of therapy on group
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICINE 
Effect of Antibiotics on Streptococcal Tonsillitis-Brink et al. 305
A streptococci is shown in Figure 6. The the aureomycin-treated patients. The higher
patients included in this analysis are only incidence of new types in the control group
those from whom group A organisms were was probably due to cross-infection in the
isolated during the period of hospitalization. hospital; presumably patients being treated
The most striking effect on group A strep- with penicillin or aureomycin were protococci was exhibited by those patients tected from acquisition of a new organism.
TABLE II
EFFECT OF TREATMENT ON THE
AVERAGE TOTAL LEUKOCYTE COUNT
9uJJ
80 -’
70 -*
60..
50 -*
40 -’
30 -.
20 -’
10-s
M Control
0--O Penicillin
Treatment
Day of I. ~_~~~
Disease
None Penicillin
2---!----
Aureomycin
1 : 14,500 13,900 14,800
14,250 12,900 12,700
3 ~ 12,300 10,400 8,300
4 10,700
I 1 ...‘..
7,500
receiving penicillin. Within one day the
prevalence dropped from 98.5 to 14.1 per
cent, and forty-eight hours after admission
only 3.1 per cent of the individuals in this
group harbored streptococci producing betahemolysis. Cultures obtained between three
and four weeks after admission to the
hospital showed that 10.7 per cent harbored
the infecting type. The carrier rate for the
infecting type in the control group was 46.7
per cent.
4
Hospital Day
FIG. 6. Effect of therapy on persistence of the infecting type of streptococcus.
* Culture taken on fifth or sixth day.
The effect of aureomycin therapy on
group A streptococci in the throat differed
from that observed in patients receiving
penicillin. The number of isolations of
streptococci did not decrease rapidly after
institution of aureomycin treatment. On
the second hospital day 70 per cent continued to harbor the organism but by the
time of discharge from the hospital, on the
fifth or sixth day, streptococci were isolated
from only 4.5 per cent. In contrast to the
patients receiving penicillin who showed
only 10.7 per cent with the infecting type
at the time of follow-up examination 44.8
per cent of the aureomycin-treated group
exhibited group A streptococci of the same
serologic type isolated at the time of hospitalization. New types were isolated from
23.7 per cent of the controls, 11.6 per cent
of the penicillin group and 10.3 per cent of
MARCH, 1951
Efect of Treatment on the Immunologic Kesponse. Both penicillin and aureomycin
therapy resulted in the inhibition of the
production of antistreptolysin “0.” Eightytwo per cent of the sets of sera from the
control group exhibited a diagnostic increase of two or more dilution increments of
the antistreptolysin titer. In contrast only
52 and 57 per cent of the patients receiving
penicillin and aureomycin, respectively,
showed such an increase in titer. Not only
was the number of diagnostic increases in
titer less in the treated groups but also the
magnitude of the response was inhibited.
COMMENTS
Patients with streptococcal respiratory
infections have been treated with penicillin
and aureomycin but the data available are
not sufficient to permit a quantitative
evaluation of such therapy. The presence of
an epidemic of streptococcal infections
in a population group composed of young 
306 Effect of Antibiotics on Streptococcal Tonsillitis-Brink et al.
healthy males offered an ideal opportunity
for the study of various forms of treatment.
In this investigation the sole criterion for
inclusion in the study group was exudate
on the tonsils or tissues of the oropharynx.
Since previous studies4v” have indicated
that many cases of exudative tonsillitis and
pharyngitis in military populations are not
related to streptococci, it was first necessary
to establish the streptococcal etiology of
these infections. Studies6*’ of streptococcal
epidemics have indicated that in approximately 80 to 85 per cent of individuals so
infected antibodies to streptolysin “0” will
develop early in convalescence. In the
present study 82 per cent of the convalescent
sera from the control group showed an
increase in titer of antistreptolysin when
compared to the titers of the acute phase
sera. In addition the isolation of group A
streptococci, the clinical features of the
illness and the elevated leukocyte counts
indicate that the majority of the infections
were caused by the streptococcus.
The various features of the treated and
control groups were analyzed to determine
whether or not the groups were comparable.
Since the absence of tonsils may affect the
febrile temperature curve as well as the
duration of the carrier state,’ it is important
to note that the frequency of a history of
tonsillectomy was similar in the three groups.
There was some variation in the frequency
of certain symptoms due to a change in the
infecting type of streptococcus during the
course of the study. Results of previous
studies4y8 indicate that the clinical features
of the illnesses may be related in part to the
serologic type of group A organisms. The
present observations established that type
24 streptococcus, which caused only four
illnesses in the aureomycin-treated patients,
was associated with a mild disease of short
duration. Since type 24 was the infecting
organism in many of the control group and
the group which received penicillin, the
effect of aureomycin would tend to be
masked. Actually aureomycin proved to be
even more effective than penicillin in
shortening the natural course of the illness.
A favorable effect of therapy on the
duration of symptoms was noted in almost
every instance but it was usually not
dramatic. A rather marked reduction in
the frequency of sore throat was effected
by both penicillin and aureomycin. This
observation is interesting since sulfadiazine
also is effective in this regard.’ During the
third day of illness 65, 48 and 24 per cent
of the patients in the control, penicillin and
aureomycin-treated groups, respectively,
still complained of sore throat. The effect of
early treatment on the duration of complaints was dramatic; whereas if treatment
was instituted after twenty-four hours of
illness, favorable results were not striking.
With the exception of nausea and vomiting the patients who received aureomycin
recovered symptomatically somewhat more
rapidly than those who were treated with
penicillin. Although the differences were
not always great, they are believed to be
significant particularly since the infecting
type of streptococcus in the aureomycintreated group was associated with a more
severe illness than that observed in the other
two groups. The high incidence of nausea
and vomiting in the group receiving aureomycin was probably due to the toxic effects
of the drug.
Neither aureomycin nor penicillin therapy
resulted in an appreciably beneficial effect
on the abnormal physical signs. This observation is similar to that recorded in
patients receiving sulfadiazine treatment. 7
The most objective criterion available
for the measurement of a favorable effect in
this disease is the duration of fever. For
this purpose the duration of the illness before
the institution of therapy must be considered since the temperature normally
drops rapidly after thirty-six to forty-eight
hours of illness. Treatment during the first
twenty-four hours of illness was attended by
a dramatic decrease in the number of
individuals with fever. This effect was most
marked following aureomycin treatment,
During penicillin therapy the erythrocyte
sedimentation rate returns rapidly to normal
values.g The present study established the
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICINE 
Effect of Antibiotics on Streptococcal Tonsillitis--Brink et al. 307
fact that the leukocyte count also returns to
normal and that aureomycin is more effective than penicillin in producing this
effect.
Administration of aureomycin or penicillin was followed with a change in the
bacterial flora of the throat. Penicillin
therapy was followed with the complete and
early eradication of the streptococci in most
instances. In contrast to penicillin aureomycin apparently inhibited the growth of
the organisms during the period of treatment but had little or no effect on the carrier
state; thus its effect is similar to sulfadiazine’
in this regard. Because of the reduced hazard
of spread by the convalescent carrier the
eradication of streptococci would appear
to he a desirable feature of penicillin treatment. * Both drugs probably protected the
individual from cross-infections in the
hospital.
Since penicillin eradicates the organism
rapidly and aureomycin only inhibits its
growth, it is difficult to explain the fact
that both compounds suppress antibody
production to a similar degree. This would
seem to indicate that both drugs result in
the effective inhibition of the antigen
(streptococci) during the period of medication. Sulfadiazine, which inhibits the growth
of streptococci in the oropharynx, does inhibit antibody formation7 although the
degree of inhibition is not of the order of
magnitude of that observed following aureomycin treatment.
Both compounds decreased the incidence
of earaches when compared to the untreated
group. The fact that acute rheumatic fever
developed in only two patients receiving
penicillin and five patients of the control
group suggests that penicillin may prevent
rheumatic fever. The two cases occurring
following penicillin were the only instances
observed in a much larger study of 698 patients treated with this drug and is in contrast to seventeen instances of the disease
among 702 controls who received no specific
* Subsequent studies have demonstrated that aureomycin therapy may eradicate streptococci in many
instances.
therapy. lo This study lo established that
penicillin is an effective agent in the prevention of rheumatic fever when administered during the preceding acute streptococcal infection. The fact that no case of
rheumatic fever followed the acute infections treated with aureomycin suggests this
drug may also prevent the subsequent
development of acute rheumatic fever.
Aureomycin was more effective than
penicillin in shortening the course of the
acute illness. It is important to emphasize
that this conclusion is justified only for the
doses employed. There is some evidence
that the amount of penicillin used was not
optimal. Kilbourne and Loge” showed
that when penicillin was administered in
doses of 20,000 to 50,000 units every three
hours antistreptolysin developed in only
14 per cent of patients. The data of Kilbourne and Loge]’ indicate that treatment
with frequent injections of penicillin may
eradicate the antigen (streptococci) more
effectively than depot penicillin as employed
in this study.
Because aureomycin therapy did not
eradicate the streptococcus, it is difficult to
explain its superiority over penicillin in the
treatment of the acute phases of the infection. It seems entirely possible that the
favorable effects observed were due to some
alteration in the body metabolism as well
as specific action against the invading
organism.
SUMMARY
A controlled evaluation of penicillin and
aureomycin therapy in 475 patients with
streptococcal exudative tonsillitis and pharyngitis studied by clinical, bacteriologic
and immunologic methods is reported.
Aureomycin was found to be somewhat
more effective than penicillin in lowering
the fever and causing rapid subsidence of
symptoms. Both drugs exhibited slight
action on the abnormal physical signs. They
were equally effective in inhibiting antibody formation. Penicillin usually eradicated the carrier state whereas aureomycin
failed to influence the incidence of con- 
Effect of Antibiotics on Streptococcal Tonsillitis-&ink et al.
valescent carriers. Earaches seldom developed in patients treated with these drugs.
With either drug early treatment is required
if the disease process is to be materially
shortened.
Acknowledgments. The authors wish to thank
Col. J. C. B. Elliott, Post Commander, Col.
John K. Cullen, Surgeon, and Capt. James G.
Hirsch, Chief of Medical Service, for assistance
in making this study possible. Dr. E. A. Custer
participated in the early phases of the investigation. The authors appreciate the technical
assistance of Mary Riner, Donna Carpenter,
Phyllis Guthrie, Jo Henning, Mary Margaret
Hezebicks, T/Sgt. Earl C. Marple and Cpl.
Joseph Page. To Dr. George F. Badger and Dr.
John H. Dingle of the Department of Preventive
Medicine, Western Reserve University, Cleveland, O., the authors are indebted for their
active interest in this investigation.
REFERENCES
1. MAXTED, W. R. Preparation of streptococcal extracts for Lancefield grouping. Lancer, 255: 255-
256, 1948.
2. SWIFT, H. F., WILSON, A. T. and LANCEFIELD, R. C.
Typing group A hemolytic streptococci by M
precipitin reaction in capillary pipettes. 3.
Ex@. Med., 78: 127-133, 1943.
3. HODGE, B. E. and SWIFT, H. F. Varying hemolytic
and constant combining capacity of streptolysins:
influence on testing for antistreptolysins. J. Exper.
Med., 58: 277-287, 1933.
4. Commission on Acute Respiratory Diseases. Endemic
exudative pharyngitis and tonsillitis. Etiology and
clinical characteristics. J. A. M. A., 125: 1163-
1169, 1944.
5. KEITH, J. D. and CARPENTER, J. The diagnosis of
haemolytic streptococcal infection in acute
nasopharyngitis. Canad. 3. Pub. Health, 37: 127-
139,1946.
6. RANTZ, L. A., BOISVERT, P. J. and SPINK, W. W.
Etiology and pathogenesis of rheumatic fever.
Arch. Znt. Med., 76: 131-138, 1945.
7. Commission on Acute Respiratory Diseases. A study
of a food-borne epidemic of tonsillitis and pharyngitis due to beta-hemolytic streptococcus, type 5.
Bull. Johns Hopkins Hosp., 77: 143-210, 1945.
8. KEEFER, C. S., RANTZ, L. A., SHUMAN, H. H. and
RAMMELKAMP, C. H. Distribution of specific types
of hemolytic streptococci in eight hundred and
nineteen cases of infection. Arch. Znt. Med., 69:
952-973, 1942.
9. JERSILD, T. Penicillin therapy of scarlet fever and
complicating otitis. Lmuet, 254: 671-673, 1948.
10. DENNY, F. W., WANNAMAKER, L. W., BRINK, W. R.,
RAMMELKAMP, C. H. and CUSTER, E. A. The
prevention of rheumatic fever by treatment of the
preceding streptococcic infection. 3. -4. M. A.,
143: 151-153, 1950.
11. KILBOURNE, E. D. and LOGE, J. P. The comparative
effects of continuous and intermittent penicillin
therapy on the formation of antistreptolysin in
hemolytic streptococcal pharyngitis. 3. Clin.
Investigation, 27: 418-424, 1948.
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICINE 