Symposium on Rheumatic Fever and
Rheumatic Heart Disease
The Role of the Streptococcus in the
Pathogenesis of Rheumatic Fever*
CAPT. FRANK J. CATANZARO, M.c., CAPT. CHANDLER A. STETSON, M.c., LIEUT. ALTON
J. MORRIS, M.c., CAPT. ROBERT CHAMOVITZ, M.c., CHARLES H. RAMMELKAMP, JR., M.D.,
CAPT. BERTRAND L. STOLZER, M.C. and CAPT. WILLIAM D. PERRY, M.C.
Cleveland, Ohio
LTHOUGH the etiology of rheumatic fever A is still considered to be obscure, there
has been a steady accumulation of data
linking the disease to infection with group A
streptococci. Numerous surveys have demonstrated the occurrence of epidemics of rheumatic
fever following outbreaks of scarlet fever and
other streptococcal infections. 1-5 Serologic studies
have shown that elevated titers of streptococcal
antibodies occur in the serum of patients with
rheumatic fever indicating recent contact with
the streptococcus.6-1” Further evidence relating
the two diseases was obtained when it was shown
that the incidence of rheumatic fever was greatly
diminished by the prevention or treatment
of streptococcal infections with antibacterial
agents.i3-I*
Despite the above evidence indicating that the
group A streptococcus is responsible for rheumatic fever, a disturbing fact is that these
organisms have been isolated from only 50 to
60 per cent of patients during the acute phases
of rheumatic fever.1g,20 It has been assumed that
if rheumatic fever is directly related to a streptococcal infection, nearly all of the patients should
harbor streptococci during the acute disease.
The success in isolating the streptococcus, however, is a function of the bacteriologic technics
employed and the frequency with which cultures
are obtained.
The ease with which group A streptococci
may be isolated from the oropharynges of rheumatic patients is no different than the ease with
which these organisms may be recovered from
patients convalescing from acute streptococcal
tonsillitis. In Figure 1 are presented results of
routine cultures of the oropharynges of 355
M Uncomplicated Illness (355 Cases)
O---O lllnsss Followed by Rheumatic
Fever (97 Cores)
‘“d 2 3 4
WEEKS AFTER ONSET OF STREPTOCOCCAL
ILLNESS
FIG. 1. Isolations of group A streptococci following an
untreated streptococcal infection.
patients with uncomplicated acute streptococcal
infections and ninety-seven patients whose acute
illness was followed by rheumatic attacks. None
of these patients received specific antibacterial
therapy during the period of observation. At any
one period following the streptococcal infection,
* From the Streptococcal Disease Laboratory, Francis E. Warren Air Force Base, Wyoming, and the Department
of Preventive Medicine, School of Medicine, Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio. This investigation was conducted under the sponsorship of the Commission on Acute Respiratory Diseases and the Commission on Streptococcal
Diseases, Armed Forces Epidemiological Board, and was supported by the Offices of The Surgeons General, Departments of the Army and Air Force, Washington, D. C.
DECEMBER, 1954 749 
750 Role of Streptococcus in Pathogenesis of Rheumatic Fever-Cutanzuro et al.
the infecting type of streptococcus was isolated
from an equal percentage of patients who developed rheumatic fever and of those who developed no complication. The number of patients
shown to harbor streptococci at the weekly
surveys decreased gradually so that by the sixth
TABLE I
DISTRIBUTION OF PATIENTS ACCORDING TO TYPE
OF THERAPY *
Treatment Group
First half of study:
Control.
Penicillin--9 day
Second half of study:
Sulfadiazine.
Penicillin-9 day. 297
No. of
Patients
288
301
291
-
Therapy
No specific therapy
900,000 units of depot
penicillin administered on the ninth,
eleventh and thirteenth days after the
onset of illness
Two gm. administered at time of
admission to study
followed by 1.0 gm.
every six hours for
five days
900,000 units of depot
penicillin administered on the ninth,
eleventh and thirteenth days after the
onset of illness
* Selection of patients for the various forms of therapy
was determined by the Air Force serial number.
week only half the routine cultures from both
groups of patients showed the infecting type of
group A streptococcus. Studies to be reported
elsewherezl have demonstrated that group A
streptococci can be isolated from all patients six
weeks after a streptococcal illness if special
bacteriologic procedures are employed. It appears likely, therefore, that most rheumatic
subjects harbor the organism at the onset of the
acute attack, but because of technical difficulties
the streptococci have not been isolated and
identified.
With the advent of penicillin therapy of
streptococcal infections further investigation into
the factors responsible for rheumatic fever became possible. Such treatment markedly reduces
the attack rate of rheumatic fever, decreases the
antibody response and eradicates the streptococcus from most patients.17 Since rheumatic
patients frequently exhibit an exaggerated
response to streptococcal antigens as compared
with patients who do not develop this complication > 7,g.10.12 one obvious conclusion is that the
inhibition of antibody production is in some
manner responsible for the prevention of rheumatic fever. On the other hand, despite a low
antibody response following an infection treated
with various antibiotics, rheumatic fever still
developed in a few patients. An analysis of these
patients revealed that most of them continued to
harbor the infecting type of streptococcus.22
Thus it appeared that the persistence of the
streptococcus after infection might be significant
in the pathogenesis of rheumatic fever.
The present study was designed to determine
the relative importance of the group A streptococcus and of excessive antibody production in
the pathogenesis of rheumatic fever. For this
purpose, patients with streptococcal infections
were treated by one of three methods. In one
group of patients, the streptococcus was eradicated by treatment with penicillin, but therap!
was delayed until late in the course of the illness
at a time when near maximal antigenic stimulation had already occurred. In a second group of
patients, the production of antibody was
inhibited without eradication of the streptococcus. This was accomplished by the administration of sulfadiazine during the acute illness.
A third group of patients who received placebo
injections served as controls and thus remained
carriers and sustained maximum antibody
production.
METHODS AND DESCRIPTION OF STUDY
The methods of selection of patients and of the
routine clinical and laboratory studies were
similar to those previously reported.17 The
patients consisted of young adult airmen admitted to the hospital with exudative tonsillitis
or pharyngitis. Historical information, physical
examination and laboratory studies were accomplished in a standard manner at the time of
admission to the hospital and nine, thirteen,
twenty-one and thirty-five days after the onset
of symptoms. The criteria for the diagnosis of
rheumatic fever were those of Jones23 with
slight modifications. l7
Chronologically, the study was divided into
two parts. (Table I.) The first portion, conducted
from January, 1953 to April, 1953, consisted
of 301 men who received penicillin and 288 men
who were given placebos and served as controls.
Procaine penicillin in oil containing 2 per cent
aluminum monostearate was administered intramuscularly in doses of 900,000 units on the
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICINE 
Role of Streptococcus in Pathogenesis
ninth, eleventh and thirteenth days after the
onset of illness. The second portion of the study,
conducted from April, 1953 to January, 1954,
consisted of 297 patients who received penicillin
as described previously and 291 patients who
were given sulfadiazine. Two gm. of sulfadiazine
of Rheumatic Fever-Catanzaro et al. 75’
patients who had streptococcal pharyngitis, the
analysis was limited to those patients who had
group A streptococci isolated from the initial
culture of the throat. Of the 103 patients from
whom group A streptococci were not isolated,
70 per cent were observed for twenty-one days.
TABLE II
COMPARABILITY OF TREATM
Family history of rheumatic fever. ..........
Confluentexudate ........................
Laboratory results on admission:
Leukocyte count of lZ,OOO/cu. mm. or more
Group A streptococci:
Type 3 .............................
14 .............................
19 .............................
30 .............................
Other types. .........................
Antistreptolysin titer 125 units or less. .....
Onset of illness to admission to study:
Less than 30 hr .........................
30-59 hr., ....................
Greater than 59 hr .....................
Present for convalescent examination:
21days ................................
35days ................................
....... 6.8 4.6
....... 15.9 21.5
.......
.......
56.5 57.6
37.3 29.6
6.2 13.8
. . . .
EN
-
T GROUPS*
First Half Second Half
I
Control Penicillin
9 day Sulfadiazine Penicillin
(220) (230)
9 day
(219) (201) IPer cent
0.9
18.6
0.5
11.4
72.0 70.0 67.7 68.0
23.5 18.6
8.0 11.8
27.7 26.8
26.9 27.9
13.9 11.8
75.6 73.1
17.6 18.8
27.0 21.8
14.1 15.8
26.2 25.2
15.1 18.4
74.5 73.8
51.8
35,l
13.2
95.5 98.6
88.6 90 4
87.4
87.0 I
49.7
41.7
8.6
95.0
95.0
* Includes all patients maintained on the study from whom group A streptococci were isolated.
-
were administered at the time of admission to
the hospital, following which each patient received 1 gm. every six hours for five days (21 gm.
Patients were excluded from the investigation
if they exhibited evidence of a suppurative comtotal).
plication at the time of admission to the hospital,
gave a personal history of rheumatic fever or had
had a previous reaction to penicillin. During the
second part of the study patients were also excluded if they had experienced a reaction to
sulfadiazine or, in most instances, if there was a
history of rheumatic fever in other members of
the family.
COMPARABILITY OF STUDY GROUPS
During the period of this investigation there
was a high incidence of non-streptococcal
exudative pharyngitis. In order to include only
DECEMBER, 1954
In one patient in this group rheumatic fever
developed twenty-seven days from the onset of
Suppurative complications characteristically
the acute illness for which he had received no
occur duriqg the early phases of the streptococcal infection. In the first portion of the study
specific therapy.
the incidence of suppurative complications was
high since neither group of patients received
specific therapy until the ninth day of illness
when penicillin was administered to half of the
patients. During the second portion of the study
the patients who did not receive penicillin until
the ninth day also developed suppurative complications. The patients who received sulfadiazine experienced a lower incidence of such
complications. 24 In all instances penicillin was
administered to those patients in whom suppurative complications developed and they were then 
752 Role of Streptococcus in Pathogenesis of Rheumatic Fever-Catanzaro et al.
excluded from the analysis. Many of these patients were followed during convalescence and
none was observed to develop rheumatic fever.
Thus the final analysis was based on the following groups: in the first half of the study 220 patients were in the control group and 219 received
TABLE III
PERSISTENCE OF THE INFECTING TYPE OF STREPTOCOCCUS
IN THOSE PATIENTS INITIALLY POSITIVE FOR TYPABLE
GROUP A STREPTOCOCCI
T
Treatment
First half
Conrrol
Penicillin-9 day.
Second half
Sulfadiazine.
Penicillin-9 day.
-
Per cent Isolations 01 Infecting Type
No. of Streptococc”s*
of Patients
9 days 13 days 21 days 35 days
_____
211 95 96 85 64
209 96 2 I1 11
223 71 88 81 59
193 92 1 2 2
* Patients were excluded at a given convalescent examination if a new
serologic type of streptococcus was isolated.
penicillin; in the second portion 230 received
sulfadiazine and 201 were given penicillin.
Pertinent information obtained at the time of
admission is listed in Table II. The number of
patients having a family history of rheumatic
fever was lower during the second half of the
study due to the exclusion of most of such persons at the time of the original examination. The
serologic types of streptococci isolated on admission varied in the two parts of the study in that
type 14 became more prevalent and type 19
less prevalent during the second half.
RESULTS
The effects of the different forms of therapy
on the infecting serologic type of streptococcus
are summarized in Table III. The carrier rates
in the untreated patients and in the penicillintreated patients were equal nine days after the
onset of illness. At this time the infecting organism was isolated from a smaller number of those
treated with sulfadiazine. Since sulfonamides
have been shown to suppress the growth of
streptococci,25 the low carrier rate in this group
at nine days was probably a reflection of such
bacterial inhibition. Although the carrier rates
in the control and sulfadiazine-treated groups
remained high throughout convalescence, the
frequency of isolation of the organism by a single
direct culture of the throat decreased as the
period of time from the onset of illness lengthened. This apparent decrease in the carrier
rates in the two groups was probably due to the
technics employed for, as mentioned previously,
if more adequate procedures had been used,
all the patients probably would have been
shown to harbor the infecting organism.
TABLE IV
EFFECT OF THERAPY ON ANTISTREPTOLYSIN RESPONSE IN
THOSE PATIENTS FROM WHOM TYPABLE GROUP A
STREPTOCOCCI WERE ISOLATED ON ADMISSION
First half
Control
Penicillin-9 day
Second hall
Sulfadiazine.
Penicillin-9 day.
NO.
of Patients
211
209
223
193
Average Antistreptolysin Titer
units units units units
118 174 339 339
113 168 293 291
112 148 245 270
109 145 260 267
In the patients who received penicillin therapy
on the ninth day there was a marked fall in
carrier rates on the thirteenth day and the rates
remained low at subsequent examinations. No
reason was found for the difference in the carrier
rates in the penicillin-treated patients at twentyone and thirty-five days between the first and
second part of the study.
The antistreptolysin responses to infection are
recorded in Table IV. During the first part of the
study the untreated patients showed an average
increase of 221 units at twenty-one days as
compared to 180 units in the penicillin-treated
patients. Thus only an 18 per cent decrease in
antibody response resulted from delaying penicillin therapy nine days after the onset of illness.
Some of the difference in antibody production
in the two groups was due to the acquisition of
new infections during the interval between collection of the serum specimens. If the twenty-one
control and six penicillin-treated patients who
acquired a new type of streptococcus are excluded, the average increase in antibody was 202
and 181 units in the control and penicillin
groups, respectively. This difference is not statistically significant.
During the second half of the study* those
patients who were treated with penicillin devel-
* None of the group of penicillin-treated patients
acquired a new type of streptococcus. Six of the patients
receiving sulfadiazine acquired a new serologic type of
streptococcus, but excluding these individuals did not
alter the average antibody titers.
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICINE 
Role of Streptococcus in Pathogenesis of Rheumatic Fever-Cutanzuro et al. 753
oped slightly less antistreptolysin than the first
group of penicillin-treated patients. In the patients who received sulfadiazine the average
antistreptolysin response at twenty-one days was
considerably less than that observed in the
control group. At thirty-five days, however,
the antibody titer in the sulfadiazine group increased over the titer recorded at twenty-one
days, whereas in the other three study groups no
such increase was observed. This increase in
antibody titer late in convalescence was probably due to rapid proliferation of the organism
after sulfadiazine was discontinued. Thus antigenie stimulation continued later in the course
of the disease in those treated with sulfadiazine
than in the other patients.
The occurrence of rheumatic fever in the
various treatment groups is summarized in
Table v. For purposes of comparison the cases
are tabulated according to the interval from the
onset of the streptococcal illness to the onset of
rheumatic fever. The first division of nine days
was the period of time before the penicillin
groups received therapy. The next large division
includes the tenth through the forty-fifth days.
Previous studies have shown that when the
latent period is less than thirty-five days, the
observed streptococcal illness is apparently
responsible for the rheumatic episode.17 Those
cases which develop between the thirty-fifth
and forty-fifth days are frequently due to the
observed illness although a few patients may
have acquired an intervening streptococcal
infection. In the last division, where the interval
was greater than forty-five days, experience has
shown that an intervening infection usually is
responsible for the attack of rheumatic fever.
The number of patients who developed symptoms of rheumatic fever during the first nine
days was approximately equal in all four study
groups. Since three of the groups of patients
received no therapy during this period, the
similar attack rates of rheumatic fever indicate
that comparable groups were selected. Although
sulfadiazine therapy administered during the
first five days of hospitalization favorably altered
the course of the acute illness,24 it failed to prevent rheumatic fever during this early period.
Indeed, the attack rate of rheumatic fever was
similar to that observed in the other three
groups, suggesting that these patients did not
differ in this regard from the other patients.
From nine of the ten patients who developed
symptoms of rheumatic fever during the first
DECEMBER, 1954
nine days the infecting type of streptococcus
was again isolated at the time of onset of the
complication.
Following the administration of penicillin on
the ninth day of illness there was a striking decrease in acute rheumatic episodes. In contrast,
TABLE v
DISTRIBUTION OF CASES OF RHEUMATIC FEVER ACCORDING
TO THE INTERVAL FROM ONSET OF PHARYNGITIS TO
ONSET OF RHEUMATIC FEVER
Interval
in Days
Number developing rheumatic fever
Control Penicillin
(220)
9-day
(219)
o-4
5-9
1
2
1
2
10-14
15-19
20-24
25-29
30-35
36-45
>45
I i
1 3
Sulfadiazine
(230)
1
1
0
I
I-
- I
Penicillin
O-day
(201)
2
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
_T--
1
the patients who received sulfadiazine experienced no protection against rheumatic attacks.
Thus there was a total of twenty rheumatic
episodes observed from the tenth to the fortysixth day among the 450 sulfadiazine and
placebo-treated patients. In contrast, 420 patients received penicillin after recovery from the
acute streptococcal illness, and only three developed acute rheumatic fever during the same
period.
Of the twenty patients in the two groups who
received sulfadiazine or placebos, the infecting
type of streptococcus was isolated from each
man during the rheumatic episode. Group A
streptococci were not isolated during the rheumatic attack from the three patients who
received penicillin. The symptoms of the complication began fifteen, seventeen and twentynine days after the onset of the streptococcal
illness in the latter patients and in each instance
classic features of rheumatic fever were exhibited.
There were five rheumatic patients who devel- 
754 Role of Streptococcus in Pathogenesis of Rheumatic Fever-Cutanzaro et al.
oped symptoms later than forty-five days after
the observed streptococcal infection, but none
of these rheumatic attacks could be directly
related to the observed illnesses. The patient in
the control group had acquired a different
serologic type of streptococcus during the
interim. Of the four patients in the penicillin
groups two had acquired different serologic
types and two had experienced a sore throat
during the intervening period.
In summary, the treatment of streptococcal
infections with penicillin nine days after the onset of illness eliminated the infecting organism
from the throat, failed to inhibit antibody formation appreciably, and significantly reduced the
attack rate of rheumatic fever. In contrast, the
administration of sulfadiazine during the acute
streptococcal illness suppressed antibody formation somewhat more effectively than penicillin at
twenty-one days, but did not eradicate the
organism nor prevent rheumatic fever. The
patients who received no specific therapy sustained maximum antibody formation, remained
carriers and experienced the usual attack rate of
rheumatic fever.
COMMENTS
These data indicate that penicillin therapy
administered even after the acute symptoms of
streptococcal infections have subsided will reduce the attack rate of rheumatic fever. Because
of this observation, it is probably also advisable
to administer penicillin to all patients observed
in the early phases of acute rheumatic fever,
under the assumption that eradication of the
streptococcus may influence the rheumatic
process. Certainly, further information as to the
possible effects of such therapy is urgently
needed.
The data also support the conceptZ2 that even
though a drug favorably influences the acute
symptoms, it should not be used in the therapy
of streptococcal infections unless adequate
bacteriologic studies have established that such
treatment results in elimination of the streptococcus from the respiratory tract. The prevention of rheumatic fever is the most important
aspect of the therapy of these respiratory infections, and the evidence presently available indicates that rheumatic fever is not prevented
unless the organism is eradicated.22 For this
reason, it should be emphasized that sulfadiazine or other sulfonamides should never be
employed in the treatment of streptococcal infections. In the present study, sulfadiazine therapy
did not result in elimination of the infecting
organism and the incidence of rheumatic fever
was even higher than in patients receiving placebo therapy.
In addition to these practical considerations,
the data have certain theoretic implications
with respect to the pathogenesis of rheumatic
fever. In previous studies17.L8~22 it has been apparent that the prevention of rheumatic fever
by treatment of streptococcal infections with
penicillin could be correlated with eradication of
the infecting organism and with suppression of
antibody formation. It has not been possible,
however, to dissociate these latter two effects or
to determine which, if either, is of primary
importance. In the present study, by withholding penicillin treatment until the convalescent
phase of the streptococcal disease was well
advanced, it has been possible to prevent
rheumatic fever without suppressing significantly the antistreptolysin response. If the antistreptolysin response can be regarded as
indicative of the response to other streptococcal
antigens, it may be concluded that the prevention of rheumatic fever by penicillin treatment of
streptococcal diseases is not related, in any direct
or essential fashion, to the suppression of the
immune response ordinarily seen. These data
do not, of course, indicate that the immune
response is not involved in the pathogenesis of
rheumatic fever, but suggest that it is not of
primary importance.
On the other hand, these results strongly indicate that the living streptococcus plays a more
direct role in the production of rheumatic fever
than has generally been considered. Although
several investigators have isolated group A
streptococci in a high percentage of cases26-28
from affected cardiac valves at autopsy, others
have not found these organisms with any degree
of regularity2g or have obtained negative results
despite laborious attempts to culture the organisms from the heart, subcutaneous nodules,
joints and blood.30 If it be postulated that living
streptococci are present in the affected tissues
in rheumatic subjects, it is difficult to explain
the non-suppurative character of the rheumatic
lesions. However, eradication of streptococci by
penicillin therapy in the present study was
followed by a prompt fall in the number of new
cases of rheumatic fever, and the most obvious
interpretation of this finding is that the living
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICINE 
Role of Streptococcus in Pathogenesis of Rheumatic Fever-Catanzaro et al. 755
streptococci themselves must be present, in the
oropharynx or elsewhere, in order for rheumatic
fever to develop.
Certain alternative hypotheses regarding the
pathogenesis of rheumatic fever are rendered less
tenable by the results of the present investigation. If “autoantibodies” were involved,31
eradication of the streptococcus late in the
course of convalescence would hardly be expected to alter the outcome. If a ‘%-heumatogenic
toxin” were involved 32 one would expect that it
would have been pr;duced during the first few
days of illness and that delayed antibacterial
therapy would be ineffective. The concept that
rheumatic fever begins as a disease entity during
the acute streptococcal infection, only becoming
clinically manifest two or three weeks later, is
not supported by these data, since the streptococcal illness was allowed to progress without
interference until a time when the rheumatic
process should have already been initiated.
There is some evidence1g,33 to support the
hypothesis that rheumatic fever is the pathologic
result of a hypersensitivity reaction involving
streptococcal antigens. The development of a
state of “bacterial allergy” or “hypersensitivity”
to bacterial antigens has been demonstrated
following infections with numerous bacteria, including streptococci. 34 This hypersensitivity,
which is of the “delayed” or tuberculin type and
is not obviously related to the presence or titer
of circulating antibody,35 appears to depend, in
general, on the gradual liberation of small
quantities of the antigen involved. Thus the
intradermal injection of non-hemolytic streptococci is followed by the development of tuberculin type hypersensitivity, while the intravenous
injection of these organisms results in the
development of a high titer of circulating antibody, but fails to produce delayed hypersensitivity. 36 It is possible that during the acute
and convalescent phases of streptococcal pharyngitis some antigenic product of the living
streptococcus is produced continuously and
stimulates the development, over a period of
days or weeks, of delayed hypersensitivity. Interference with the production of this material, by
eradication of the streptococci even as late as the
ninth day of illness, might be expected to prevent
the development of hypersensitiveness of sufficiently high degree to elicit rheumatic fever.
Alternatively, the rheumatic process might depend on a hypersensitivity reaction involving a
product of streptococci, in which case eradicaDECEMBER, 1954
tion of the organism would eliminate an essential
reactant and prevent rheumatic fever.
SUMMARY
Rheumatic fever was prevented when penicillin therapy of streptococcal pharyngitis was
delayed until nine days after the onset of illness.
Such delayed therapy resulted in eradication of
the streptococci from the nasopharynx but did
not significantly affect the antistreptolysin
response. The data strongly suggest that the
development of rheumatic fever requires the
presence of living streptococci throughout
convalescence. This conclusion is in conflict
with certain of the hypotheses previously
advanced to explain the pathogenesis of rheumatic fever but may be in accord with the
concept that hypersensitivity of the tuberculin or
“delayed” type is involved.
Treatment of acute streptococcal pharyngitis
with sulfadiazine resulted in only temporary
suppression of the streptococci in the nasopharynx and was entirely ineffective in prevention of rheumatic fever.
Acknowledgments: Dr. Alan C. Siegel of the
professional staff assisted in the early phases of
this study. The authors are indebted to the
entire technical and administrative staff for their
assistance.
REFERENCES
1. JONES, T. D. and MOTE, J. R. The clinical importance of infection in the respiratory tract in
rheumatic fever. J. A. M. A., 113: 898, 1939.
2. COLLIS, W. R. F. Acute rheumatism and haemolytiz
streptococci. Lancet, 1: 1341, 1931.
3. MADSEN, T. and KALBAK, K. Investigations on
rheumatic fever subsequent to some epidemics of
septic sore throat (especially milk epidemics).
Acta path. et microbid. Scandinav., 17: 305, 1940.
4. SHELDON, W. On acute rheumatism following tonsillitis. Land, 1: 1337, 1931.
5. HENNINGSEN, E. J. and ERNST, J. Milk epidemic of
angina, originating from a cow with mastitis and
due to Streptococcus pyogenes (LanceSeld Group
A). J. Hyg., 38: 384, 1938.
6. TODD, E. W. Antihaemolysin titers in haemolytic
streptococcal infections and their significance in
rheumatic fever. &it. .I. Exper. Path., 13: 248,
1932.
7. COBURN, A. F. and PAULI, R. H. Studies on immune response of the rheumatic subject and its
relationship to the activity of the rheumatic
process. VI. The significance of the rise of antistreptolysin level in the development of rheumatic
activity. J. Clin. Znuestigation, 14: 769, 1935.
8. WINBLAD, S., MALMROS, H. and WILANDER, 0.
Studies in the pathogenesis of rheumatic fever;
antistreptolysin titer in acute tonsillitis and rheu- 
756 Role of Streptococcus in Pathogenesis of Rheumatic Fever-Catanzaro et al.
matic fever. Acta med. Scandinav., supp. 196, p. 533,
1947.
9. ANDERSON, H. C., KUNKEL, H. G. and MCCARTY, M.
Quantitative antistreptokinase studies in patients
infected with group A hemolytic streptococci: a
comparison with serum antistreptolysin and
gamma and globulin levels with special reference
to the occurrence of rheumatic fever. J. C/in.
Investigation, 27: 425, 1948.
10. HARRIS, T. N. and HARRIS, S. Studies in the relation
of hemolytic streptococcus to rheumatic fever. v.
Streptococcal anti-hyaluronidase (mucin-clot prevention) titers in the sera of patients with rheumatic fever, streptococcal infections and others.
Am. J. M. SC., 217: 174, 1949.
11. RANTZ, L. A., DICAPRIO, J. M. and RANDAI.L, E.
Antistreptolysin 0 and antihyaluronidase titers in
health and in various diseases. Am. J. M. SC., 224:
194, 1952.
12. STETSON, C. A. Streptococcal Infections, p. 208.
Edited by McCarty, M. New York, 1954. Columbia University Press.
13. THOMAS, C. B. and FRANCE, R. A preliminary report
of the prophylactic use of sulfanilamide in patients
susceptible to rheumatic fever. BuII. Johns Hopkins
Hosp., 64: 67, 1939.
14. COBURN, A. F. and MOORE, L. V. The prophylactic
use of sulfa&amide in rheumatic subjects. M.
Clin. North America, 24: 633, 1940.
15. KUTTNER, A. G. and REYERSBACH, G. The prevention of streptococcal upper respiratory infections
and rheumatic recurrences in rheumatic children
by the prophylactic use of sulfanilamide. J. Clin.
Investigation, 22: 77, 1943.
16. STOLLERMAN, G. H. and RUSOFF, J. H. Prophylaxis
against group A streptococcai infections in rheumatic fever patients. Use of new repository penicillin preparation. J. A. M. A., 150: 1571, 1952.
17. WANNAMAKER, L. W., RAMMELKAMP, C. H., JR.,
DENNY, F. W., BRINK, W. R., HOUSER, H. B.,
HAHN, E. 0. and DINGLE, J. H. Prophylaxis of
acute rheumatic fever by treatment of the preceding streptococcal infection with various amounts of
depot penicillin. Am. J. Med., 10: 673, 1951.
18. HOUSER, H. B., ECKHARDT, G. C., HAHN, E. O.,
DENNY, F. W., WANNAMAKER, L. W. and RAMMEI.-
KAMP, C. H., JR. Effect of aureomycin treatment
of streptococcal sore throat on the streptococcal
carrier state, the immunologic response of the host,
and the incidence of acute rheumatic fever.
Pediatrics, 12: 593, 1953.
19. MCCARTY, M. Present state of knowledge concerning
pathogenesis and treatment of rheumatic fever.
BUN. NW l’ork Acad. Med., 28: 307, 1952.
20. SWIFT, H. F. Textbook of Medicine, 7th ed., p. 171.
Edited by Cecil, R. L. Philadelphia, 1947. W. B.
Saunders.
21. RAMMELKAMP. C. H.. JR.. KRAUSE. R. M.. DENNY.
F. W., JR: and WAN~AMAKER; L. W: To be
published.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
Streptococcal Disease Laboratory. To be published.
JONES, T. D. Diagnosis of rheumatic fever. J. A. M.
A., 126: 481, 1944.
MORRIS, A. J., CIIAMOVITZ, R., CATANZARO, F. .J.
and RAMMEI.KAMP, C. H., JR. Prevention of
rheumatic fever by treatment of streptococcal
infections. III. The effect of sulfadiazine. To be
published.
Commission on Acute Respiratory Diseases. A study
on a food-borne epidemic of tonsillitis and pharyngitis due to beta hemolytic streptococci, type 5.
Bull. Johns Hopkins Hosp., 77: 143, 1945.
COLLIS, W. R. F. Bacteriology of rheumatic fever.
Lam@ 2: 817, 1939.
GREEN, C. A. Researches into the aetiology of acute
rheumatism. I. Rheumatic carditis: post-mortem
investigation of nine consecutive cases. AmI.
RhPumat. Dir., 1: 86, 1939.
THOMSON, S. and INNES, J. Haemolytic streptococci in
cardiac lesions of acute rheumatism. Brit. M. J.,
2: 736, 1940.
WATSON, R. F. and HIRST, G. K. Unpublished
observations.
KINSELLA, R. A. and SWIFT, H. F. Bacteriologic
studies in acute rheumatic fever. Arch. Znt. MPd.,
19: 381, 1917.
CAVELTI, P. A. Studies on the pathogen&s of
rheumatic fever. II. Cardiac lesions producing in
rats by means of autoantibodies to heart and connective tissue. Arch. Path., 44: 13, 1947.
KELLNER, A. and ROBERTSON, T. Selective necrosis of
cardiac and skeletal muscle induced experimentally
by means of proteolytic enzyme solutions given
intravenously. J. Exper. Mfd., 99: 387, 1954.
SWIFT, H. F. The etiology of rheumatic fever. Ann.
Int. Med., 31: 715, 1949.
DERICH, C. L. and SWIFT, H. F. Reactions of rabbits
to non-hemolytic streptococci. I. General turberculin-like hypersensitiveness, allergy, or hyperergy
following the secondary reaction. J. Exper. Mrd.,
49: 615, 1929.
35. CHASE, M. W. Bacterial and Mycotic Infections of
Man. 2nd ed., p. 170. Edited by Dubos, R. .J.
Philadelphia, 1952. J. P. Lippincott.
36. ANGEVINE, D. M. A comparison of cutaneous
sensitization and antibody formation in rabbits
immunized by intravenous or intradermal injections of indifferent or hemolytic streptococci and
pneumococci. J. Exper. Med., 73: 57, 1941.
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICINE 