COMPARATIVE EFFECTS OF PENICILLIN, AUREOMYCIN
AND TERRAMYCIN ON STREPTOCOCCAL
TONSILLITIS AND PHARYNGITIS
By FLOYD W. DENNY, M.D.,* LEWIS W. WANNAMAKER, CAPT., MC, USAR,* AND
EDWARD 0. HAHN, MAJ., MC, USAR
Cleveland
T HE variety of antibiotics now available to the practicing physician has complicated
rather than simplified the problem of selection of the most effective drug for the
treatment of specific infections. Although results from in vitro studies and from therapy
of experimental infections assist in the selection of the most efficacious drug, final evaluation must be made by comparative observations in man. The present study is a clinical
evaluation of the relative merits of penicillin, aureomycin and terramycin for the treatment
of group A streptococcal tonsillitis and pharyngitis. DESCRIPTION OF THE STUDY This study was conducted at Warren Air Force Base, Wyo., between March 31 and May -4, 1951. A homogeneous group of early streptococcal infections was selected by the following criteria: TABLE 1 COMPARABILITY OF TREATED AND CONTROL GROUPS Treatment Group Control (50 cases)
%
Penicillin
(53 cases)
%
Aureomycin
(53 cases)
%
Terramycin
(51 cases)
%
History of tonsillectom
Age 17-21 yr.
Group A streptococci on
admission culture Type 1 ‘
Type 5
Type 6 T\-pe 14
36
84
98
1410
8
46
23
91
91
179
8
47
49
83
96
17
138
53
33
92
96
33
410
43
(1)exudate on the tonsils or pharynx, (2) a total leucocyte count of 10,000 or greater and (3)
duration of symptoms less than 31 hr. Patients were assigned to 1 of 4 therapeutic groups according
to corresponding suits in decks of well shuffled cards. Fifty-three patients were treated with peniFrom the Streptococcal Disease Laboratory, Francis E. Warren Air Force Base, Wyo., and the
Department of Preventive Medicine, Western Reserve University, School of Medicine, Cleveland.
This investigation was conducted under the sponsorship of the Commission on Acute Respiratory
Diseases and the Commission on Streptococcal Diseases, Armed Forces Epidemiological Board, and
supported by the Offices of The Surgeons General, Departments of the Army and Air Force, Washington, D.C.
(Received for publication Aug. 7, 1952.)
* Present address: Heart Hospital, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis.
.7
Downloaded from www.aappublications.org/news at UCSF LIBRARY on October 5, 2019
8 F. W. DENNY, L. W. WANNAMAKER AND E. 0. HAHN
cillin, 53 with aureomycin, 51 with terramycin and 50 received placebos. The 4 groups of patients
appeared to be comparable (table 1 ) except for an unexplained variation in the number of patients
giving a history of tonsillectomy. Approximately one third of all patients gave such a history, but
the percentage ranged from 23 in the penicillin group to 49 in the aureomycin group.
Penicillin was administered by intramuscular injection of 600,000 units of crystalline procaine
penicillin G* daily for 5 days. Crystalline aureomycin hydrochloride or crystalline terramycin
hydrochloride* was given orally in a dose of 1 gm. on admission and 0.5 gm. every 6 hr. for 19
additional doses. The control patients received lactose placebos every 6 hr. for 20 doses. No other
medication was allowed except codeine for severe discomfort.
All patients were questioned and examined daily for 6 days by 2 physicians who had no knowledge of the treatment being administered. Symptoms were recorded for each 12 hr. period for the
1st 48 hr., and daily thereafter. Physical signs were recorded daily. Oral temperatures were recorded
every 4 hr. Total leucocyte counts were determined on the 1st 3 days of hospitalization. Cultures
were obtained from the oropharynx on the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 5th days of hospitalization and on
app#{231}oximately the 21st day after the onset of illness at the time of follow-up examination. Acute
phase sera were obtained on the 1st or 2nd day of illness and convalescent phase sera at the time
of the follow-up examination. Electrocardiograms consisting of the 3 standard limb leads were recorded within several days after admission, and again on the 6th, 8th, 10th, 14th and 21st days of
Illness. The patients were questioned at these times for the presence of complications.
Strains of Str. beta hemolyticus were grouped and typed according to the method of Swift, Wilson
and Lancefield.’ Antistreptolysin “0” titers were determined by a modification of the method of
Hodge and Swift.’ RESU LTS The effect of treatment on the symptoms of streptococcal sore throat is demonstrated
in chart 1. Treatment with penicillin, aureomycin or terramycin reduced the number of
patients who complained of headache and sore throat. Aureomycin tended to be less
effective than the other two drugs in reducing the prevalence of headache. The effect of
treatment on sore throat was approximately the same in all groups. In general, patients
without tonsils complained of less sore throat than did those patients who had tonsils.
Because of the high percentage of tonsillectomized patients in the aureomycin group the
demonstrated effect of treatment with this drug may be exaggerated. With the symptom
chilliness there was little or no difference noted among any of the groups. The incidence
of anorexia and nausea in the patients receiving aureomycin was equal to that observed in
the control group. Sixteen per cent of the patients in the control group vomited at some
time during the clinical course, but the incidence was 29% in the aureomycin group and
only 9 and 8% in the penicillin and terramycin groups, respectively. Aureomycin and terramycin produced more diarrhea than did either penicillin or the placebo. Forty-five per
cent of the patients in the former two groups gave a history of loose stools on the fourth
day of illness.
The effect of treatment on the physical signs of streptococcal sore throat is shown in
chart 1. The three forms of treatment were approximately equal with respect to their effect
on the manifestations of inflammation except that the disappearance of exudate was somewhat less rapid in the patients treated with penicillin than in the other two treated groups.
In the penicillin group a low percentage (23%) of patients and in the aureomycin
group a high percentage (49%) of patients had had their tonsils removed. Since tonsillectomized patients lost their exudate more rapidly than did those with tonsils, the effect
of penicillin on the disappearance of exudate may be unduly minimized and the effect of
aureomycin may be magnified.
* Penicillin (duracillin) was supplied by Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis; aureomycin hydrochloride by Lederle Laboratories Division, American Cyanamid Company, New York, and terramycin
hydrochloride by Charles Pfizer and Company, New.York.
Downloaded from www.aappublications.org/news at UCSF LIBRARY on October 5, 2019
EFFECTS OF PENICILLIN, AUREOMYCIN AND TERRAMYCIN 9
The per cent of patients in each group who had fever of 37.8#{176}C. or over for each four hour period is shown in chart 2. All three forms of therapy were effective in reducing
fever, and there is little difference in the rate of defervescence among the treated groups.
Cl)
C) 0
I-zw
C., Ui aDAY OF DISEASE
Key: Control ___ Penicillin Aureomycin Terromycin
CHART 1. Effect of various antibiotics on symptoms and signs of
acute streptococcal tonsillitis and pharyngitis.
When all groups were considered together, a history of tonsillectomy seemed to have no
effect on the disappearance of fever.
Suppurative complications occurring within 14 days after the onset of the acute illness were rare in all the groups (table 2). Only those complications appearing after therapy
had been instituted for at least 24 hours are included. The same type of group A streptococcus was identified at the time of both illnesses except for three patients in the terramycm group from whom a different type group A streptococcus was isolated at the second
illness, and one patient in the aureomycin group who harbored Str. beta hemolyticus of
unidentified type at the time of the second illness.
Downloaded from www.aappublications.org/news at UCSF LIBRARY on October 5, 2019
2 40 HOURS CHART 2. Effect of various antibiotics on occurrence of fever.
10 F. W. DENNY, L. W. WANNAMAKER AND E. 0. HAHN
Three cases of acute rheumatic fever followed the illnesses observed in this study. One
each occurred in the control, penicillin and terramycin groups. These began 31, 27 and 19
days, respectively, after the onset of the streptococcal sore throat. No history of an intervening respiratory illness was obtained in any of these men, but the patient from the
control group and the patient from the penicillin group showed bacteriologic evidence of
acquisition of a new type of streptococcus. In addition, both the patient from the control TABLE 2 EFFECT OF THERAPY ON COMPLICATIONS OF STREPTOCOCCAL SORE THROAT
Complication Treatment Control (50 cases) Penicillin
(53 cases)
Aureomycin
(53 cases)
Terramycin
(51 cases)
Suppurative:
Exudative tonsillitis 1 1 1 3 Peritonsillar cellulitis 0 0 0 1 Sinusitis 1 0 0 0 Earache 2 0 0 0
Nonsuppurative:
Rheumatic fever 1 1 0 1
PR>0.21 sec. 0 0 0 1 T1 inverte(l or fiat 0 0 0 0 No rheumatic fever 49 52 53 50
PR>0.21 sec. 0 1 0 1
T1 inverte(l or flat 1* 0 it 1
* This l)atient also had a sedimentation rate of 20 (Wintrobe method) and maximum observed temperature of 40.0#{176}C.
t This patient also ha(l aching and tenderness of R knee for 3. days, maximum sedimentation rate of 23 (Wintrobe method) and maximum observed temperature of 40.0#{176} C.
Downloaded from www.aappublications.org/news at UCSF LIBRARY on October 5, 2019
3 4
DAY OF DISEASE
EFFECTS OF PENICILLIN, AUREOMYCIN AND TERRAMYCIN 11
CHART 3. Effect of various antibiotics on persistence of infecting type of streptococcus.
group and the patient who received terramycin gave a questionable past history of rheu- matic fever. Abnormalities of the electrocardiogram are shown in table 2. They were rare in all groups. Three patients, one from the penicillin group and two from the terramycin group,
had a prolonged conduction time. One of the latter had concomitant manifestations of TABLE 3
EFFECT OF THERAPY ON TOTAL LEUCOCYTE COUNT
Hospital
day
Per cent of patients with total leucocyte count greater
than 10,000 according to treatment group Control Penicillin Aureomycin Terramycin
First Second Third
96 100 98 98
96 87 85 76
52 42 19 14
rheumatic fever. Three patients showed T-wave changes in lead one. There was one each
from the control, aureomycin and terramycin groups, none of whom developed rheumatic
fever.
Total leucocyte counts were obtained on the first three days of hospitalization on all
patients. The percentage of counts greater than 10,000 is presented by hospital day in
table 3. All the treated groups showed a decrease on the second day as compared to the
control group. On the third day the decline in leucocytosis was more striking in the aureomycin and terramycin groups than in the penicillin group.
The effect of treatment on the infecting type of streptococcus is shown in chart 3.
Only those patients from whom a group A streptococcus was isolated at some time during
hospitalization are included. By the fifth day of illness all forms of therapy had greatly
Ui >
I-. U, 0a. U) Ui
U- 0
I-z
Ui C-) Ui a.
Downloaded from www.aappublications.org/news at UCSF LIBRARY on October 5, 2019
12 F. W. DENNY, L. W. WANNAMAKER AND E. 0. HAHN
reduced the carrier rates, while the rate in the control group was still very high. Penicillin resulted in a more rapid reduction in the carrier rate than did either aureomycin or
terramycin. Likewise at the time of the follow-up examination 21 to 33 days after the
onset of the acute illness, the carrier rate for the group treated with penicillin was lower
than that for either the aureomycin or terramycin groups. The percentage of cases in which a new type of streptococcus was isolated at follow-up was 11 in the control group,
14 in the penicillin group, 8 in the aureomycin group and 9 in the terramycin group.
Table 4 shows the effect of treatment on the development of antistreptolysin 0. Although there was some variation in the average titer of the acute phase sera, therapy with TABLE 4
EFFECT OF THERAPY ON ANTISTREPTOLYSIN 0 PRODUCTION Average titer (in units) according to
treatment group Control Penicillin Aureomycin Terramycin Acute
Convalescent
Difference
124 110
294 196
170 86 .
116
188
72
144 213
69
Per cent reduction - 49 58 59
each drug resulted in decreased antibody formation. The per cent reduction was 58 for
aureomycin, 59 for terramycin and 49 for penicillin. DISCUSSION A beneficial therapeutic effect was demonstrated in patients with streptococcal tonsillitis and pharyngitis following administration of penicillin, aureomycin or terramycin.
No one drug was consistently more effective than the other two. This is in contrast to a
study reported previously where aureomycin was more effective than penicillin in these
respects. In the previous study the dosage of aureomycin administered during the first 24
hours was 4 gm. as compared to 3 gm. in the present study. Conversely, in the previous
study the penicillin dosage during the first 24 hours was 300,000 units of depot penicillin
containing 2% aluminum monostearate in peanut oil whereas during the present study
this group of patients received 600,000 units of procaine penicillin on the first day. Since
the effect on fever, physical signs and symptoms can best be demonstrated early in the
course of treatment, it seems logical that these differences may be due to a difference in
dosage during the first 24 hours. A possible explanation of the effect of aureomycin on
fever and associated symptoms may be an antipyretic action.4 This might be more appar- ent with the larger dose. There was a rather striking difference in the gastrointestinal
complaints among the three treated groups. The incidence of anorexia, nausea and vomiting was high in the aureomycin-treated group and both aureomycin and terramycin increased the incidence of loose stools. From the standpoint of toxicity it would appear that
penicillin is the drug of choice.
Penicillin was more effective than terramycin or aureomycin in short and long term
eradication of streptococci from the throat. This is in agreement with previous studies3
except that the present dose of 10.5 gm. of aureomycin orer a five day period appeared
Downloaded from www.aappublications.org/news at UCSF LIBRARY on October 5, 2019
EFFECTS OF PENICILLIN, AUREOMYCIN AND TERRAMYCIN 13
to be considerably more effective in eradicating streptococci than the previous dose of 8.5 gm. over a four day period where no effect was demonstrable at 21 days.
All three forms of therapy resulted in a decrease in antibody formation. Leucocyte
counts returned to normal more rapidly in the terramycin and aureomycin groups than in
the penicillin group. These data are in agreement with previous observations on penicillin
and aureomycin.3
Since, except for toxicity, there was little difference among the three groups in the
acute course of the disease, the choice of drug should probably be made on the basis of
eradication of the carrier state and the effect on suppurative and nonsuppurative compli- cations. The incidence of recurrent exudative tonsillitis was slightly higher in the terramycm group but in other respects the suppurative complications were equal in the three
treated groups. The incidence of rheumatic fever was too low in this study to evaluate the
effect of these drugs but results of other studies5 seem to indicate that penicillin may be
slightly more effective than aureomycin in this regard. No study has been reported on the
effect of terramycin in prevention of rheumatic fever.
SUMMARY
The effects of penicillin, aureomycin and terramycin on the clinical course of streptococcal tonsillitis and pharyngitis were cQmpared in a controlled study. Under therapy with
these agents most of the symptoms and signs subsided somewhat more rapidly than in
control patients, leucocytosis was reduced and antibody formation was diminished; but in
the dosage used no one drug was consistently most beneficial. Penicillin was the most
effective drug in eradicating streptococci from the throat. Nausea and vomiting occurred
frequently among the patients receiving aureomycin, and diarrhea was common in both
the aureomycin and terramycin treated groups. Final determination of the drug of choice
should await comparison of the effects on suppurative and nonsuppurative complications in larger groups of patients. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Streptococcal grouping and typing sera were prepared by the Communicable Disease
Center, U. S. Public Health Service, Chamblee, Ga.
The authors wish to thank Capt. Harold I. Griffeath, Assistant Chief of Medical Service,
for his continued interest and help during this study and Lt. Col. Claretta Evans, Chief
Nurse, and the professional and nursing staff of the base hospital for their cooperation.
The authors are indebted to Dr. Charles H. Rammelkamp, Jr., Director, Capt. George
C. Eckhardt, Maj. Harold B. Houser, and Richard M. Krause of the professional staff
and to the nonprofessional staff of the laboratory for their assistance. REFERENCES 1. Swift, B. F., Wilson, A. F., and Lancefield, R. C., Typing group A hemolytic streptococci by M
precipitin reactions in capillary pipettes, J. Exper. Med. 78:127, 1943. 2. Hoclge, B. E., and Swift, H. F., Varying hemolytic and constant combining capacity of streptolysins: Influence on testing for antistreptolysins, J. Exper. Med. 58:277, 1933. 3. Brink, W. R., Rammelkamp, C. H., Jr., Denny, F. W., and Wannamaker, L. W., Effect of peni.
cillin and aureomycin on natural course of streptococcal tonsillitis and pharyngitis, Am. J.
Med. 10:300, 1951.
4. Tillotson, I. G., and Ginsberg, H. S., Unpublished observations.
5. Houser, H. B., and Eckhardt, G. C., Recent developments in prevention of rheumatic fever, Ann.
mt. Med. 37:1035, 1952.
Downloaded from www.aappublications.org/news at UCSF LIBRARY on October 5, 2019
14 F. W. DENNY, L. W. WANNAMAKER AND E. 0. HAHN
SPANISH ABSTRACT Efectos Comparativos de Ia Penicilina, Aureomicina y Terramicina en las
Amigdalitis y Faringitis Estreptoc#{243}cicas En vista de Ia variedad de antibi#{243}ticosdisponibles, Ia selecci#{243}n del ms efectivo de ellos para
el tratamiento de infecciones especIficas, se ha complicado, mas bien que simplificado y como Ia
evaluaci#{243}n final debe hacerse por observaciones comparativas en el hombre, los autores hicieron este
cuidadoso estudio. Trataron 53 enfermos con penicilina, otros tantos con aureomicina, y 55 con
terramicina que representaban un grupo homog#{233}neo de infecciones estreptoc#{243}cicas tempranas siguiendo
el criterio siguiente: exudado faringeo o amigdalino, leucocitosis de 10.000 o mayor y duraci#{243}n de
los sintomas de menos de 31 horas. El grupo se compar#{243} con 50 enfermos que recibieron placebos.
Se us#{243}penicilina procaIna cristalina G a la dosis de 600.000 unidades diarias por 5 dIas y 1 gramo
de aureomicina o terramicina como primera dosis y despu#{233}s #{189}gramo cada 6 horas d#{225}ndose19 dosis adicionales. Los resultados demuestran que los tres antibi#{243}ticos produjeron efectos terap#{233}uticos ben#{233}ficos pero
ninguna droga fu#{233}mas efectiva que la otra. La mayor parte de los sintomas y signos desaparecieron
algo mas r#{225}pidamente que en el grupo control.
Es posible que Ia mayor eficacia que se adjudic#{243} Ia aureomicina en un estudio previo se explique
por diferencias de dosificaci#{243}n usada en las primeras 24 horas durante las cuales el efecto sobre
Ia fiebre, signos fIsicos y sintomas puede ser mejor demostrado.
La penicilina fu#{233}mas efectiva en Ia erradicaci#{243}n, a corto y largo plazo, de los estreptococos de
Ia faringe.
Los tres antibi#{243}ticos produjeron una disminuci#{243}n err la formaci#{243}n de anticuerpos. La leucocitosis
descendi#{243} a lo normal mas r#{225}pidamente en los grupos tratados con aureo y terramicina.
Se presentaron nauseas y v#{243}mitos mas frecuentemente con Ia aureomicina y fu#{233}com#{252}nla diarrea
con #{233}stay Ia terramicina.
La determinaci#{243}n final de la droga de elecci#{243}n debe regirla la comparaci#{243}n de su eficacia en la
prevenci#{243}nde complicaciones en un grupo mas grande de enfermos.
Western Reserve University
Downloaded from www.aappublications.org/news at UCSF LIBRARY on October 5, 2019
Pediatrics 1953;11;7
FLOYD W. DENNY, LEWIS W. WANNAMAKER and EDWARD O. HAHN
TERRAMYCIN ON STREPTOCOCCAL TONSILLITIS AND PHARYNGITIS
COMPARATIVE EFFECTS OF PENICILLIN, AUREOMYCIN AND
Services
Updated Information &
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/11/1/7
including high resolution figures, can be found at:
Permissions & Licensing
http://www.aappublications.org/site/misc/Permissions.xhtml
entirety can be found online at:
Information about reproducing this article in parts (figures, tables) or in its
Reprints
http://www.aappublications.org/site/misc/reprints.xhtml
Information about ordering reprints can be found online:
Downloaded from www.aappublications.org/news at UCSF LIBRARY on October 5, 2019
Pediatrics 1953;11;7
FLOYD W. DENNY, LEWIS W. WANNAMAKER and EDWARD O. HAHN
TERRAMYCIN ON STREPTOCOCCAL TONSILLITIS AND PHARYNGITIS
COMPARATIVE EFFECTS OF PENICILLIN, AUREOMYCIN AND
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/11/1/7
the World Wide Web at:
The online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is located on
Copyright © 1953 by the American Academy of Pediatrics. All rights reserved. Print ISSN: 1073-0397.
American Academy of Pediatrics, 141 Northwest Point Boulevard, Elk Grove Village, Illinois, 60007.
been published continuously since 1948. Pediatrics is owned, published, and trademarked by the
Pediatrics is the official journal of the American Academy of Pediatrics. A monthly publication, it has
Downloaded from www.aappublications.org/news at UCSF LIBRARY on October 5, 2019