The Effect of Erythromycin on Resolution of Symptoms
Among Adults with Pharyngitis Not Caused by
Group A Streptococcus
Kay Petersen, MD, Russell S. Phillips, MD, Jane Soukup, MS,
Anthony L. Komaroff, MD, Mark Aronson, MD
OBJECTIVE: To determine the effect of treatment with erythromycin on the resolution of symptoms among adults with
pharyngitis not caused by group A streptococcus (GAS).
DESIGN: Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.
SETTING: Ambulatory setting (hospital-based general internal medicine practices, walk-in clinic, employee health service, and university health service).
PATIENTS: One hundred and eighty-six adults who met eligibility criteria and whose chief complaint included sore throat.
Patients with positive cultures for GAS were excluded.
INTERVENTION: Ninety-three patients received erythromycin
(333 mg three times daily for 10 days) and 93 control patients received placebo.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Major outcome measurements included time to improvement in sore throat,
time to improvement in cough, time to improvement in activity level, and subjective sense of well-being. The average
age of the patients studied was 26.6 years; 35% were men.
Patients given erythromycin had more rapid resolution of
sore throat symptoms (hazard ratio 1.43; 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.00, 2.03; p 5 .049). Cough also resolved more
rapidly in patients receiving erythromycin (hazard ratio 2.22;
95% CI 1.01, 4.88; p 5 .05). There were no differences between the two treatment groups in improvement of activity
level or how sick patients felt in general. Most of the benefit
in resolution of sore throat was conferred on patients who
sought medical care within 2 days of onset.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the benefit of erythromycin treatment for patients with non–GAS pharyngitis is
small and of borderline statistical significance. Because of
the small size of the effect and because widespread use of
erythromycin could promote drug resistance, we do not recommend routine use of erythromycin in adult patients with
this type of pharyngitis.
KEY WORDS: erythromycin; pharyngitis; non–group A streptococcus (GAS); sore throat, resolution of.
J GEN INTERN MED 1997;12:95–101.
haryngitis is among the more common acute illnesses
in the United States.1,2 Rational and practical approaches to the diagnosis of group A streptococcus (GAS)
infections exist.3,4 However, GAS accounts only for approximately 10% of all cases of pharyngitis in adults.4 It is
widely believed, consequently, that the majority of patients with pharyngitis have viral illnesses.5 Nevertheless,
antibiotics are prescribed widely for pharyngitis, independent of the presence of GAS,6,7 although there is great
variation in clinical strategies among practitioners.8
Our previous investigations and those of others have
suggested that many cases of non-GAS pharyngitis may
be caused by nonviral organisms and respond to therapy
with antibiotics.9–14 Because treatment practices vary for
cases of pharyngitis that are not attributable to GAS, any
benefits of antibiotic therapy could have a substantial impact. We conducted a randomized, placebo-controlled trial
of erythromycin and placebo in the treatment of pharyngitis in adults not infected with GAS to evaluate the effects
of antibiotic treatment on symptoms.
METHODS
Study Population
We enrolled patients who came for medical care to
employee health services, walk-in clinics, or general internal medicine practices at Beth Israel Hospital, Boston
City Hospital, and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Medical Department. Patients between the ages of
18 and 50 were eligible if a sore throat was among their
chief complaints. We excluded patients who had been ill
for more than 6 days, whose rhinitis symptoms were more
prominent than the complaint of sore throat, whose oral
temperature was 408C or greater, who had symptoms of
urinary tract infection or vaginitis, were pregnant or nursing, had a history of rheumatic fever, had significant medical illnesses other than hypertension, had taken antibiotics
within the previous 10 days, had a history of erythromycin allergy, did not have a telephone at home, were not literate in English, had previously enrolled in the study, or
would be unable to cooperate with the study protocol in
the opinion of study personnel. Patients were also excluded if any evidence of pneumonia or otitis media was
found during the intake physical examination.
Received from the Division of General Medicine and Primary
Care, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Hospital, Harvard
Medical School and the Charles A. Dana Research Institute
and the Harvard Thorndike Laboratory, Beth Israel Hospital,
Boston, Mass. (KP, RSP, JS, MA); and from the Division of General Medicine and Primary Care, Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass. (ALK).
Supported by the Henry J. Kaiser Foundation and by a grant
from The Upjohn Company.
Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr. Phillips:
Beth Israel Hospital, 330 Brookline Ave., Boston, MA 02215.
P
96 Petersen et al., Erythromycin Effect on Adults with Pharyngitis JGIM
Patients were screened for eligibility between January
1983 and December 1984. Of 998 patients screened, 420
met eligibility criteria and 215 agreed to participate. The
major reasons for exclusion: were illness duration greater
than 7 days (44%); nasal congestion was the most prominent symptom (22%); temperature above 408C (1%); dysuria or vaginitis (9%); pregnancy or lactation (3%); history
of rheumatic fever (3%); a chronic illness (11%); recent
antibiotic use (17%); history of erythromycin allergy (4%);
no telephone at home (6%); inability to read English (5%);
age less than 18 or greater than 50 (7%). (The percentages
add up to more than 100 because patients may have had
more than one reason for exclusion.) The major reasons
patients refused to participate were unwillingness to take
antibiotics, insistence on therapy with an antibiotic, lack
of time for follow-up, and unwillingness to have blood
drawn. Participating patients were randomized to receive
either active drug or placebo. Three patients were dropped
from the analysis because their data forms were misplaced before data entry. The final study group therefore
consisted of 212 randomized patients.
Treatment Assignment
Patients were randomized to regimens of erythromycin (333 mg) or placebo three times daily. Erythromycin
was provided as the delayed-release erythromycin base
(E-mycin, The Upjohn Company, Kalamazoo, Mich.). We
selected this erythromycin preparation for study because
it required dosing three times daily rather than four times
daily. Placebo pills were identical in appearance to erythromycin capsules and consisted of lactose primarily in a
gelatin capsule (also provided by The Upjohn Company).
Both physicians and patients were blinded to treatment
group assignment. Patients whose initial throat cultures
were positive for GAS were told to discontinue their study
medication and begin a 10-day course of penicillin, or
erythromycin if there was a history of penicillin allergy.
Data Collection
Patient Evaluation
At intake, we obtained a history of the severity of several upper respiratory symptoms that included sore
throat, coryza, sneezing, nasal obstruction, headaches,
cough, sputum production, hoarseness, achiness, and feverishness. We asked about the duration of the present
illness, use of cigarettes, activity level, and use of other
medications. We performed a physical examination to assess temperature and respiratory rate, and abnormalities
of the ears, nose, throat, cervical lymph nodes, and chest.
To assess the severity of each symptom, we asked patients
to report severity on a 4-point categorical scale with 0 if the
symptom was absent, 1 if the severity of the symptom was
mild, 2 if moderate, and 3 if severe. Physician evaluators
recorded their recommendations for symptomatic therapy. We discouraged the use of antipyretics and offered
codeine, guaifenesin, and pseudoephedrine as indicated
to patients who requested symptomatic remedies.
Patient Follow-up
We asked patients to complete a daily questionnaire
for 2 weeks in which they recorded the use of medications
other than study drug, the severity of upper respiratory
symptoms, and potential adverse reactions to erythromycin such as nausea, anorexia, or diarrhea. We also asked
them to record their temperatures and to report activity
levels on the questionnaire for the period of follow-up. Patients reported their activity level on a 4-point categorical
scale ranging from “able to carry out usual activities with
no difficulty” to “unable to carry out usual activities and
needing to spend most of time in bed.” They also recorded
how sick they felt on a 4-point scale ranging from “not
sick at all” to “extremely sick.” Patients completed their
first diary form at the enrollment visit.
We called patients on three occasions after enrollment to encourage continued diary completion, to inquire
about compliance with the study medication regimen, to
ask about use of other medications, and to ask whether
patients thought they were taking erythromycin or placebo. We asked patients to return for follow-up 2 to 3
weeks after enrollment for repeated cultures. Patients
completed the symptom diary again, and we counted their
pills to assess compliance. We collected diaries at the follow-up visit and paid each patient $20 for participation.
Laboratory Evaluation
We obtained throat cultures from all patients using
double-tipped dry cotton swabs. The Children’s Hospital Microbiology Laboratory (Boston, Mass.) grouped b-hemolytic
streptococcal isolates using standard techniques. Isolates
were identified as group A, B, C, F. G, or other (nongroupable isolates).
Data Analysis
The final study group consisted of all patients who met
inclusion criteria and were randomized to active drug or
placebo, had a negative culture for GAS, and returned for
follow-up. We compared demographic factors, cigarette
use, presence or absence of symptoms, severity of sore
throat, activity level, physical findings, and culture results
(non-GAS subtypes) in the erythromycin and placebo
groups. We used x2 analysis or Fisher’s Exact Test, as appropriate for categorical variables, and the Wilcoxon
Rank-Sum Test for continuous variables. We defined statistical significance as p , .05.
We compared outcomes using survival analysis. To
avoid multiple comparisons and to focus our analysis on