PREVENTION OF RHEUMATIC FEVER
Treatment of the Preceding Streptococcic Infection
CAPT. FLOYD W. DENNY
CAPT. LEWIS W. WANNAMAKER
CAPT. WILLIAM R. BRINK
Medical Corps, Army of the United States
CHARLES H. RAMMELKAMP Jr., M.D.
Cleveland
and
EDWARD A. CUSTER, M.D.
Palo Alto, Calif.
The prevention of acute rheumatic fever by the
prompt treatment of streptococcic infections with penicillin has been attempted in this study. The results
obtained show that this attempt was successful, and,
because of their importance, these results are presented
here in a preliminary report.
The significance of an adequate means of prevention
may be realized when it is considered that rheumatic
fever develops in an estimated 200,000 to 250,000 persons in the general population of the United States
yearly.1 Figures for the Armed Services similarly
show a high incidence, with an average of 7,300 cases
annually for the seven year period from 1942 through
1948.2 The gravity of the disease itself is emphasized
by the estimate of Paul that at least 460,000 persons
in the country today have rheumatic heart disease.3
Not only is rheumatic fever a menace to health, but
it is also a serious economic problem. A conservative
estimate of the cost of each case that occurs in the
Armed Services is $16,000.-
DESCRIPTION OF THE STUDY
The study was conducted at Fort Francis E. Warren,
in southeastern Wyoming. The Fort is an air force
technical training base where approximately 80 per
cent of the men are trainees who report after twelve
weeks of basic training at a southwestern base. The
study began Jan. 24, 1949 and ran continuously until
July 1, 1949, except for a ten day period in April.
Although the average strength of the base during the
study was 8,000 men, the actual number exposed to
infection was much greater because the men remained
in school only eight to thirty-two weeks.
All patients admitted to the hospital for disease of
the respiratory tract were seen within a few hours by
one of the members of the professional staff of the
laboratory. Those having exúdate on the tonsils or
on the pharyngeal wall were included in the study group.
A total of 1,634 such patients were observed.
A total of 798 patients whose Air Force serial num¬
bers ended in an even digit received penicillin treat¬
ment, and 804 patients whose serial numbers ended
with an odd digit comprised the control group and
received no specific treatment.4 Prior to March 3,
1949 the treatment consisted of 300,000 units of crystal¬
line procaine penicillin G (suspended in peanut oil
containing 2 per cent aluminum monostearate) given
intramuscularly as soon after admission as possible.
This dose was repeated in seventy-two hours. After
March 3 the following change was made in the dosage
schedule : 300,000 units were administered at the time
of admission and again in forty-eight hours, and 600,000
units were given ninety-six hours after the initial dose.
Of the 798 patients who received penicillin, 253 were
treated before March 3. Eighty-eight per cent of the
treated patients received the first penicillin within sixty hours after the onset of the symptoms of the strepto- coccic illness.
Follow-up studies for the detection of rheumatic
fever were performed between the third and fourth
weeks after the initial infection, without knowledge of
the serial numbers of the patients or of their previous
treatment. Those patients suspected of having acute
rheumatic fever were hospitalized until a satisfactory
diagnosis was established. Rigid criteria for diagnosis
were followed. A modification of the classification of
Jones s
was used. This classification may be seen in
the following tabulation :
Major Manifestations
Carditis
a. Definite cardiac enlargement
b. Appearance of a significant murmur heretofore not
present
c. Friction rub
. d. Heart block or other electrocardiographic findings indica¬
tive of carditis
e. Cardiac failure
Migrating polyarthritis
History of recurrences
Chorea
Subcutaneous nodules
This investigation was supported through the Commission on Acute Respiratory Diseases, Armed Forces Epidemiological Board, Office of the Surgeon General, Washington, D. C.
From the Streptococcal Disease Laboratory, Fort Francis E. Warren, Wyo., and the Department of Preventive Medicine, Western Reserve
University School of Medicine, Cleveland.
1. Swift, H. F.: Rheumatic Fever, in Cecil, R. L.: A Textbook of
Medicine, Philadelphia, W. B. Saunders Company, 1947, p. 168.
2. Department of Preventive Medicine, Surgeon General's Office.
3. Paul, J. R.: The Epidemiology of Rheumatic Fever and Some of Its Public Health Aspects, New York, Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, 1943.
4. Thirty-two patients were excluded from the analysis because they
were treated with aqueous penicillin by the ward physician for various
reasons. In none of these patients did acute rheumatic fever subsequently develop.
5. Jones, T. D.: The Diagnosis of Rheumatic Fever, J.A.M.A. 126:
481 (Oct. 21) 1944.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a Georgetown University Medical Center User on 05/25/2015
Minor Manifestations
Fever
Abdominal pain
Arthralgia
Skin rash
a. Erythema marginatum
b. Erythema multiformeEpistaxis
Pulmonary changes
Nonspecific electrocardiographic changes
Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (20 or above con¬
sidered abnormal)
Anemia
For a diagnosis of definite acute rheumatic fever a
patient had to have two major manifestations or one
major and two minor manifestations. For a diagnosis
of probable acute rheumatic fever a patient had to have
one major and one minor, one major or two minor
manifestations. Instances of abdominal pain, epistaxis.
Table 1.—Cases of Rheumatic Fever Found at the Follow-Up
Examination in the Treated and Untreated Croups
Number of Patients
i-*--.
Treated Untreated
Definite rheumatic fever. 2 .17*
Probable rheumatic fever. 2 6
Total. 4 23t
*
Test of significance shows that probability is O.OOOfi.
t Test of significance shows that probability is 0.0002.
Table 2.—Persistence of Group A Beta Hemolytic Streptococci
in the Treated and Untreated Groups
Treated untreated
(Percentage) (Percentage)
Persons with group A beta hemolytic
streptococci on admission. 78.3 81.7
Persons with group A beta hemolytic
streptococci on follow-up examination 18.1 52.7
pulmonary changes and anemia were encountered but
did not contribute to the classification of these patients.
No patient with chorea or subcutaneous nodules was
encountered. Only persons in whom acute rheumatic
fever developed between ten to thirty-five days after the
onset of the observed streptococcic infection are included
in this report.
Throat cultures and blood specimens were obtained
from the patients on admission and again at the time of
the follow-Hp examination. Strains of beta hemolytic
streptococci isolated from cultures were grouped and
typed according to the method of Lancefield.6 Antistreptolysin O titration was performed on acute and
convalescent serums according to a modification of the
method of Hodge and Swift.7
RESULTS
Of the 798 patients that were treated with penicillin,
definite acute rheumatic fever developed in only 2. In
contrast, the disease developed in 17 of the untreated
patients (table I), a difference which could be due to
chance only 6 times in 10,000. Of the 2 patients in the
treated group who became ill with rheumatic fever,
1 was treated within eight hours after the onset of
the symptoms of streptococcic disease and the second
approximately seventy-two hours after the onset.
Probable acute rheumatic fever developed in 2
patients in the treated group and in 6 patients in the
untreated group. Of the 2 patients in the treated group.
1 received penicillin forty-eight hours after the onset
of symptoms of streptococcic disease and the second
one hundred and eight hours after the onset. Whether
the time of treatment of the initial infection is related
to the development of poststreptococcic nonsuppurative
complications cannot be determined at this time.
The effect of penicillin treatment on the presence of
betahemolytic streptococci in cultures of the throat is
shown in table 2. In the treated group the nunfber of
persons having streptococci was reduced from 78.3 per
cent on admission to 18.1 per cent at the time of the
follow-up examination. The untreated group showed
a reduction from 81.7 per cent to only 52.7 per cent.
The development of antistreptolysin O in the treated
and untreated groups was also different. In the treated
group only 51 per cent of the patients showed a rise
in titer of two or more tubes, while 73 per cent of the
untreated patients showed a similar rise. Tests of sig¬ nificance support the validity of these differences.
The prevention of rheumatic fever, the inhibition of
antibody and the partial eradication of streptococci in
the group of patients treated with "penicillin assume
more significance when the composition of the treated
group and that of the control group are compared. That the two groups were comparable is demonstrated
in table 3, in which various features are presented. Moreover, a large proportion of the illnesses in both
groups were streptococcic in origin, since group A beta
hemolytic streptococci were isolated from 80 per cent
of all cultures made at admission and since 73 per cent
of the untreated patients showed an antistreptolysin
response of two or more tubes.
COMMENT
The data presented concerning the incidence of rheu¬
matic fever in the treated and control groups establish
the fact that penicillin therapy of acute streptococcic infections will almost completely prevent the subse¬
quent occurrence of rheumatic fever. These results
emphasize again the close relationship between strepto¬
coccic disease and rheumatic fever.
Attempts to prevent the occurrence or the recurrence
of rheumatic fever during the last decade have centered
around the streptococcic disease that precedes most
cases of acute rheumatic fever. Coburn," Kuttner and
Reyersbach ,J and Hodges10 showed that sulfonamide
drugs, given prophylactically, not only reduced the inci¬
dence of streptococcic disease but also reduced the
occurrence of rheumatic fever. This would seem to be
a practical means of prevention in two situations: (a) in
closed groups in which the incidence of streptococcic
disease is extremely high and (b) in select groups, such
as patients with inactive rheumatic fever or rheumatic
heart disease, in which the danger of recurrence is great.
6. Swift, H. F.; Wilson, A. T., and Lancefield, R. C.: Typing Group
A Hemolytic Streptococci by M Precipitin Reactions in Capillary Pipettes,
J. Exper. Med. 78:127 (Aug.) 1943.
7. Hodge, B. E., and Swift, H. F.: Varying Hemolytic and Constant
Combining Capacity of Streptolysins: Influence on Testing for Antistreptolysins, J. Exper. Med. 58:277 (Sept.) 1933.
8. Coburn, A. F.: The Prevention of Respiratory Tract Bacterial Infections by Sulfadiazine Prophylaxis in the United States Navy,
J.A.M.A. 126:88 (Sept. 9) 1944.
9. Kuttner, A. G., and Reyersbach, G.: The Prevention of Streptococ- cal Upper Respiratory Infections and Rheumatic Recurrences in Rheumatic
Children by the Prophylactic Use of Sulfanilamide, J. Clin. Investigation 22: 77 (Jan.) 1943.
10. Hodges, R. G.: The Use of Sulfadiazine As a Prophylactic Against
Respiratory Disease, New England J. Med. 231:817 (Dec. 21) 1944.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a Georgetown University Medical Center User on 05/25/2015
This method of prevention has not proved to be practical
for the general population, however, because of the
toxicity of the sulfonamide drugs, the high precentage
of sulfonamide-resistant strains of streptococci that
develop and the difficulty that is entailed in mass
prophylaxis.8
Treatment after the development of the streptococcic
infection has been another approach to the problem.
Sulfonamide drugs have proved to be ineffective when
used in this manner.11 Experience with penicillin has
been conflicting. Weinstein, Bachrach and Perrin12
treated 225 patients with streptococcic disease with
penicillin ;
in 7 of these patients rheumatic fever subse¬
quently developed. This observation supports Fin¬
land's 13 conclusion, from a review of the literature,
that penicillin is not effective when used in this manner
for the prevention of rheumatic fever. On the con¬
trary, Massell, Dow and Jones 14 employed penicillin to
treat ten clinical and five subclinical hemolytic strepto¬ coccic infections in patients hospitalized for rheumatic
fever or rheumatic heart disease; the patients failed to
exhibit subsequent recurrences. Jersild15 has shown
that poststreptococcic complications, including nephritis,
Table 3.—Comparability of Treated and Untreated Groups
798 804
Treated untreated
Patients Patients
(Percentage) (Percentage)
Age (years):
17-1!» .61.0 62.0
20 and over. 39.0 38.0
Previous history of rheumatic fever. 3.5 4.4
Tonsils present. 72.7 70.7
Cervical nodes enlarged or tender. 50.1 46.3
Leucocyte count 13,000 or over at admission 54.7 56.3
Persons with group A beta hemolytic
streptococci at admission. 78.3 81.7
Antistreptolysin O titer of 125 units or
less at admission. 70.3 69.1
Follow-up obtained. 80.7 82.8
are reduced after penicillin treatment of the initial ill¬
ness, but he makes no statement about the occurrence of
rheumatic fever.
The theory has been advanced that rheumatic fever
is associated with a peculiar response to an unknown
antigen-antibody reaction. Kilbourne and Loge16
showed that early and intensive pencillin therapy against
streptococcic disease suppressed the production of anti¬
streptolysin O. It has been shown here that adequate
treatment with penicillin not only suppresses the anti¬
streptolysin response but also prevents rheumatic fever.
Whether the antibody suppression is only a reflection
of the inhibition of some more basic process in the
mechanism of rheumatic fever or is in itself the responsi¬ ble factor is entirely speculative at this time.
Exúdate on the tonsils or oropharynx was used as
the sole means of selection of patients to be included
in this study because it was a
rapid, easily standardized
method. It was thought that such a criterion would
include the majority of streptococcic infections of the
respiratory tract, since various studies have shown that
exudative lesions of the throat appear in 60 to 90 per
cent of streptococcic infections,17 particularly in a popu¬
lation experiencing epidemic rates of streptococcic ill¬
nesses. The isolation of group A streptococci from 80
per cent of the patients and the demonstration of an
increase in the antistreptolysin O titer in 73 per cent
of the control group indicate that the majority of the
patients actually had streptococcic disease. A few
undoubtedly had nonstreptococcic exudative tonsillitis.
If the incidence of rheumatic fever is to be reduced
materially by early treatment with penicillin, it becomes
necessary that streptococcic infections be diagnosed
accurately and early. In some cases the clinical findings alone will permit an almost certain diagnosis of strep¬ tococcic infection. Characteristically, such illnesses
present a sudden onset of sore throat with pain on swal¬
lowing, fever and other constitutional reactions, diffuse
redness and edema of the soft palate, tonsils and oropharynx, discrete or confluent exúdate and large or tender
cervical lymph nodes. Supportive data may be obtained
from the laboratory. Many patients will have an ele¬
vated total leukocyte count. Cultures of the pharynx will almost always show a predominant growth of beta
hemolytic streptococci. Depending on the availability and use of the preceding criteria, a large percentage of
streptococcic respiratory infections can be reliably and
rapidly diagnosed, particularly during an epidemic period. Treatment with penicillin can thus be instituted
immediately.
SUMMARY
Evidence is presented to indicate that rheumatic fever
can be prevented by the treatment of streptococcic dis¬
ease with penicillin. A total of 798 patients with strep¬ tococcic infections were treated with penicillin ;
in only 2 did acute rheumatic fever subsequently develop. Of
804 untreated patients, the disease developed in 17.
Penicillin therapy likewise suppresses the antistrep¬ tolysin O response and eradicates the streptococci in
many cases.
11. Commission on Acute Respiratory Diseases: A Study of a Food- Borne Epidemic of Tonsillitis and Pharyngitis Due to Beta-Hemolytic Streptococcus, Type 5, Bull. Johns Hopkins Hosp. 77: 143 (Sept.) 1945.
12. Weinstein, L.; Bachrach, L., and Perrin, T. S.: Studies of the
Influence of Penicillin on the Immune Reactions in Streptococcal Phar- yngitis, J. Clin. Investigation 28:817 (July) 1949.
13. Finland, M.: Use of Penicillin in Infections Other Than Bacterial
Endocarditis, Advances Int. Med. 2:350, 1947.
14. Massell, B. F.; Dow, J. W., and Jones, T. D.: Orally Administered
Penicillin in Patients with Rheumatic Fever, J.A.M.A. 138: 1030
(Dec. 4) 1948.
15. Jersild. T.: Penicillin Therapy in Scarlet Fever and Complicating Otitis, Lancet 1:671 (May 1) 1948.
16. Kilbourne, E. D., and Loge, J. P.: The Comparative Effects of
Continuous and Intermittent Penicillin Therapy on the Formation of
Antistreptolysin in Hemolytic Streptococcal Pharyngitis, J. Clin. Investi- gation 27:418 (July) 1948.
17. Rantz, L. A.; Boisvert, P. J., and Spink, W. W.: Hemolytic Streptococcic and Nonstreptococcic Diseases of the Respiratory Tract, Arch. Int. Med. 78:369 (Oct.) 1946. Footnote 11.
Patents, Commissions, Rebates and Secret Remedies.—
An ethical physician will not receive remuneration from patents
on or the sale of surgical instruments, appliances and medicines,
nor profit from a copyright on methods or procedures. The
receipt of remuneration from patents or copyrights tempts the
owners thereof to retard or inhibit research or to restrict the
benefits derivable therefrom to patients, the public or the medical
profession. The acceptance of rebates on prescriptions or
appliances, or of commissions from attendants who aid in the
care of patients, is unethical. An ethical physician does not
engage in barter or trade in the appliances, devices or remedies
prescribed for patients, but limits the sources of his professional
income to professional services rendered the patient. He should
receive his remuneration for professional services rendered only
in the amount of his fee specifically announced to his patient
at the time the service is rendered or in the form of a subsequent
statement, and he should not accept additional compensation
secretly or openly, directly or indirectly, from any other source.
The prescription or dispensing by a physician of secret medi¬
cines or other secret remedial agents, of which he does not
know the composition, or the manufacture or promotion of their
use is unethical.—Section 6, Chapter I of the Principles of
Medical Ethics of the American Medical Association.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a Georgetown University Medical Center User on 05/25/2015