Streptococcal Pharyngitis
Placebo-Controlled Double-blind Evaluation
of Clinical Response to Penicillin Therapy
LTC Marvin S. Krober, MC, USA; COL James W. Bass, MC, USA; MAJ George N. Michels, MS, USA
Forty-four children with a clinical diagnosis of streptococcal pharyngitis
had throat cultures performed at the initial evaluation and were assigned by
randomization to receive either oral penicillin or a placebo for 72 hours. The
treating physician, who remained blind to the treatment regimen, recorded
the child's temperature and assessed the presence and severity of other
signs and symptoms initially and at 24, 48, and 72 hours. The throat culture
was positive for group A \g=b\-hemolyticstreptococci in 26 (59%) of the initial
study group, and most of these children developed a fourfold or greater titer
rise in antistreptococcal antibodies in their serum, confirming the diagnosis
of streptococcal pharyngitis. Statistically significant clinical improvement
was observed in the group of 11 children who were later shown to have been
taking penicillin compared with the group of 15 who had taken the placebo.
Significant differences in the presence and degree of fever and severity of
symptoms persisted in the placebo-treated group for 48 hours. We conclude
that early penicillin treatment of children with streptococcal pharyngitis
significantly alters the acute clinical course of the disease.
(JAMA 1985;253:1271-1274)
PENICILLIN has been used to treat
streptococcal pharyngitis for over 40
years. Its effectiveness in eradication
of streptococcal organisms from pa¬
tients with the disease and in the
prevention of rheumatic fever is firm¬
ly established. However, there re¬
mains considerable controversy as to
the effect that penicillin treatment
has on the acute clinical course of
streptococcal pharyngitis." Although
it is generally agreed that treatment
decreases the incidence of suppurative complications, one authority in a
recent review concluded that "despite
widespread belief to the contrary,
For editorial comment
see p 1302.
evidence does not support the efficacy
of antibiotics in altering the sympto¬
matic course of pharyngitis."1 Earlier
studies on adults suggested a modest
improvement in clinical symptoms
with penicillin treatment.45 Two more
recent studies of children" and a
mixed population of children and
adults7 have shown a significant bene¬
fit from penicillin treatment, but nei¬
ther study used an appropriate place¬
bo and the clinician evaluating the
response in the study in children
alone was not blind to the type of
treatment the patient had received.
We report what we believe to be the
first prospective, randomized, place¬
bo-controlled, double-blind study in
children evaluating the effect of peni¬
cillin treatment on the clinical course
of acute streptococcal pharyngitis.
METHODS
During the period from January 1982
through March 1983 (Hawaii) and Novem¬
ber 1983 through January 1984 (Washing¬
ton), patients seen in our pédiatrie clinics
with a complaint of sore throat were
evaluated for possible entry into the study.
Candidates were excluded for any of the
following reasons: (1) duration of symp¬
toms more than 72 hours, (2) a history of
having received oral antibiotics within the
previous 72 hours or an injection of peni¬
cillin G benzathine within the previous 30
days, (3) a history of penicillin allergy, (4)
a rash suggestive of scarlet fever, (5) a
concurrent infection requiring treatment
with an antibiotic other than penicillin, (6)
a severe illness requiring immediate peni¬
cillin treatment.
The scoring system of Bréese" was used
to select patients who were likely to have
streptococcal pharyngitis. This system
uses a combination of epidemiologic, labo¬
ratory, and clinical factors to establish a
percent probability that a patient with
suspected streptococcal pharyngitis will
From the Departments of Pediatrics (Drs Krober
and Bass) and Pathology (MAJ Michels), Tripler
Army Medical Center, Honolulu; and the Madigan
Army Medical Center, Tacoma, Wash (Dr Krober).
The assertions or opinions contained herein are
the private views of the authors and are not to be
construed as official or as reflecting the views of the
Department of the Army or the Department of
Defense.
Reprint requests to Box 295, Madigan Army
Medical Center, Tacoma, WA 98431 (Dr Bass).
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of British Columbia Library User on 06/16/2015
have culture-confirmed disease. Seventyeight percent of patients with a score of 30
or more were shown by Bréese to have
culture-confirmed streptococcal pharyngi¬
tis, so all patients with a Bréese score of 30
or more were asked to participate in the
study.
After written informed consent was
obtained, those patients who agreed to
participate in the study were assigned by a
table of random numbers to receive either
penicillin V, 250 mg three times a day for
three days, or a placebo formulated to
have a similar appearance and taste. The
first dose was given before the patient left
the clinic. All patients agreed not to take
antipyretic medications during the initial
72-hour study period of observation.
Randomization of treatment schedules
was accomplished by the pharmacy so that
the treating physician, the patient, and
the parents were unaware as to whether
penicillin or the placebo had been dis¬
pensed to the patient. The treating physi¬
cian recorded the child's temperature and
assessed the presence and severity of other
signs and symptoms initially and at 24, 48,
and 72 hours. The temperature was also
taken and recorded every eight hours at
home by the parents. A scoring system
was used to quantitate symptoms and
objective signs (Table 1 ).
Throat cultures were obtained initially
and daily thereafter during the three
follow-up visits. Throat swabs were
rubbed vigorously over the tonsillar sur¬
faces and posterior pharyngeal wall and
plated immediately onto 5% sheep blood
agar and streaked. They were then incu¬
bated in 5% CO; at 35 °C for 18 to 24
hours. At this time, they were examined
for the presence of group A fi-hemolytic
streptococci (GABHS). Bacitracin disks
were used to differentiate GABHS and
non-GABHS."
Urine specimens were obtained at the
second visit (48 hours) and later assayed
for the presence of antimicrobial activity
by the method of Charney et al'" to
confirm compliance in those patients who
had been given penicillin, and to ensure
that those who had been given the placebo
had not received penicillin from another
source.
A serum specimen was obtained from all
patients at the initial visit and a convales¬
cent serum sample was obtained, when
possible, from three to four weeks later.
These paired sera were frozen at —70 °C
and later tested for antistreptolysin O
(ASO), antihyaluronidase (AH), and antideoxyribonuclease B (anti-DNase B) anti¬
bodies.
All patients whose initial throat cul¬
tures were shown to be positive for
GABHS at the end of the three-day period
of observation were treated with oral
penicillin for ten days.
RESULTS
Forty-four patients (39 in Hawaii,
five in Washington) were entered into
the study. At the end of the 72-hour
period of observation, the results of
the initial throat culture and the type
of treatment that each child had
received were made known to the
treating physician. The initial throat
culture was negative for GABHS in
18 of these patients, and they were
considered to have had nonstreptococcal pharyngitis. Further treatment
of this group was symptomatic.
The initial throat culture was posi¬
tive for GABHS in 26 (59% ) of the 44
patients studied, and most of these
patients developed a fourfold or
greater rise in ASO, AH, or antiDNase B antibodies in their convales¬
cent serum (Table 2), confirming the
diagnosis of streptococcal pharyngitis
in these children. Growth of GABHS
organisms was moderate to heavy in
most of the culture-positive patients.
Of the 26 culture-positive patients, 11
had been given penicillin and 15 had
been given the placebo. The children
in both of these groups were com¬
parable in age, sex, and presence and
severity of symptoms prior to entry
into the study, and objective findings
were also comparable with tonsillar
exúdate present in three fourths of
the patients in each group and tender
enlarged cervical lymph nodes pres¬
ent in half of the patients in each
group. Almost all patients in both
penicillin and placebo groups had
fever on entry into the study. All
patients in both groups were afebrile
by 72 hours. There was a noted
decrease in the mean temperature in
the penicillin-treated group compared
with the placebo group by eight hours
and a statistically significant de¬
crease by 16 hours that persisted for
48 hours as indicated by Student's t
test (Figure). Temperature data were
also analyzed by two-way analysis of
variance for repeated measures on
one factor and subsequent NewmanKeuls' test to determine individual
differences between means." There
was an overall difference between the
two group means (P<.005). In addi¬
tion, there was a significant interac¬
tion (P<.005) between the two
groups, indicating that the two curves
are not parallel. The Newman-Keuls'
Table 1.—Scoring System for Grading Presence
and Seventy of Symptoms and Physical Findings
Score*
Symptoms
Sore throat Absent Mild
Pain on swallowing Absent Mild
Malaise Absent Mild
Headache Absent Mild
Abdominal pain Absent Present
Physical findings
Pharynx Normal Injection
Tender cervical nodes Absent Present
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
Severe
Injection
and exúdate
Severe
Severe
Severe
•Total score may range from 0 to 15.
Table 2.—Development of Antistreptococcal Antibodies in Children in the Study Groups
No. of
Study Group Patients
Culture positive
Received penicillin 11
Received placebo 15
Total 26
Culture negative
Received penicillin 10
Received placebo 8
Total 18
Titer Rise for ASO, AH, or
Anti-DNase B Antibodies'
No. Tested No. (%) With >4X Titer Rise
11 7 (64)
13t 8 (62)
24t 15 (63)
7t 1 (14)
5t 1 (20)
12t 2 (17)
'ASO indicates antistreptoiysin O; AH. antihyaluronidase; and anti-DNase B. antideoxyribonuclease B.
tSome patients did not return to provide convalescent serum samples.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of British Columbia Library User on 06/16/2015
test showed significance at the same
time periods as indicated by Student's
t test. The initial mean "symptomphysical findings" score was almost
the same in both groups, but the
penicillin-treated group had a statis¬
tically significant decrease in score at
24 and 48 hours compared with the
placebo-treated group (Table 3).
Patients who had negative initial
throat cultures and were considered
to have nonstreptococcal pharyngitis
were comparable in age, sex, the
presence, severity, and duration of
symptoms, and initial objective clini¬
cal findings to the group of 26
patients with culture-positive strep¬
tococcal pharyngitis (Table 3). Per¬
sistence of fever and other symptoms
in this culture-negative group was
similar to that in the placebo-treated
culture-positive group. Those pa¬
tients whose initial throat culture
39-
o I
°
38-
2!
a
|
36-
24 48 72
Hours of Treatment
Comparison of persistence of fever (mean
temperature of each group) in penicillin-
(squares) and placebo-treated (circles) cul¬
ture-positive patients during initial 72-hour
period of observation. Significance (asterisks)
determined by Student's /test (P<.01).
was negative and who had received
penicillin had persistence of fever and
other symptoms similar to that in
placebo-treated patients with cul¬
ture-negative nonstreptococcal phar¬
yngitis (Table 3).
Of the 26 culture-positive patients,
all 11 in the penicillin-treated group
had negative throat cultures at 24, 48,
and 72 hours. Nearly all of the throat
cultures taken at these time intervals
from the 15 patients who had taken
the placebo remained culture positive
for GABHS.
Urine specimens that were ob¬
tained on the second day of treatment
from the 26 culture-positive patients
had antimicrobial activity in all spec¬
imens from patients in the penicillintreated group. Urine specimens were
negative for antimicrobial activity in
14 of the 15 patients in the placebotreated group. The source of antimi¬
crobial activity in the one patient in
this group could not be determined.
Urine specimens from the 18 culturenegative patients with nonstreptococ¬
cal pharyngitis were negative for
antimicrobial activity in the eight
patients who had been given the
placebo and positive in the ten who
had been given penicillin.
COMMENT
Although the numbers in the study
groups are small, we have shown in
this prospective placebo-controlled,
double-blind study a statistically sig¬
nificant clinical response of patients
with streptococcal pharyngitis to pen¬
icillin therapy. A previous report
evaluating the effect of penicillin
treatment on the acute clinical course
of illness in patients with cultureconfirmed streptococcal pharyngitis
showed a significant clinical benefit
with treatment compared with placebo-treated controls.7 In this previous
report, however, culture-negative pa¬
tients who presumably had nonstrep¬
tococcal pharyngitis exhibited a simi¬
lar clinical benefit with penicillin
treatment compared with placebo
(diphenhydramine hydrochloride)-
treated culture-negative patients
with nonstreptococcal pharyngitis.
This finding suggests that penicillin
is beneficial in the treatment of
patients with nonstreptococcal phar¬
yngitis. Although our study supports
the finding in this previous report
that penicillin treatment signifi¬
cantly alters the acute clinical course
of illness in patients with streptococ¬
cal pharyngitis, we found that peni¬
cillin-treated patients with nonstrep¬
tococcal pharyngitis did not benefit
from treatment when compared with
placebo-treated patients with non¬
streptococcal pharyngitis.
Of the 26 patients whose throat
culture was positive for GABHS,
most of the 24 tested developed a
fourfold or greater rise in ASO, AH,
or anti-DNase antibodies in their con¬
valescent serum. This elevation con¬
firms that these patients actually had
infection with GABHS and that they
were not coincidental convalescent car¬
riers of the organism. Serologie confir¬
mation of infection in this culturepositive group may have been higher
had we been able to additionally test
for nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotidase antibodies and had we obtained
and tested a second convalescent (six
to eight weeks) serum sample.
One of the most common problems
faced by pediatricians is whether to
treat a child with suspected strepto¬
coccal pharyngitis with an antibiotic
at the time of the initial visit or to
delay treatment until the result of the
throat culture is reported. If the
culture is positive for GABHS, the
need for antibiotic treatment is then
documented and, if negative, it is
documented that treatment is not
indicated. Arguments that favor de¬
lay in treatment pending throat cul¬
ture confirmation of the clinical diag¬
nosis are that delay in treatment of
up to several days does not place the
patient at risk to develop rheumatic
fever,1214 that the needless cost of the
antibiotic and risk of allergy to it are
averted in those who are culture
negative, that type-specific antibody
response and immunity are depressed
Table 3.—Age, Sex, and Mean Symptom Score of Treatment
Groups Initially and at 24, 48, and 72 hours
Treatment Group
Mean Age,
yr (Range)
No. of
Males/
Females
Mean Symptom Score (
 * SD)
Initial Visit 24 hr 48 hr 72 hr
Culture positive
Received penicillin
Received placebo
P"
Culture negative
Received penicillin
Received placebo
P*
9.3 (6-17)
7.8 (4-13)
NS
9.3 (6-11)
8.9 (3-11)
NS
4/7
7/8
NS
5/5
5/3
NS
9.6± 1.6
9.3 ±1.9
NS
9.0+ 2.6
9.9 + 2.2
NS
6.2 + 3.4 3.1±2.9 1.3+1.9
9.0±1.6 5.5+1.8 1.4±1.8
<.01 <.02 NS
8.4 ±3.6
9.2 ±2.6
NS
4.9±3.8
6.0±2.4
NS
2.1±2.1
2.4±2.3
NS
•Determined by Student's /test.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of British Columbia Library User on 06/16/2015
when treatment is given early," and
that, aside from preventing suppurative complications, treatment does
not significantly alter the acute clini¬
cal course of streptococcal pharyngi¬
tis.' Our study clearly refutes the last
reason listed for delay in treatment.
The clinical benefit observed in our
penicillin-treated patients compared
with placebo-treated patients was
significant. Penicillin-treated pa¬
tients were all afebrile within 24
hours, most had significant sympto¬
matic improvement, and the throat
culture had become negative in all, so
they were presumably noncontagious
and could be returned to school. In
contrast, placebo-treated patients
had persistence of fever and other
symptoms for 48 hours and their
throat cultures remained positive, so
that these patients were presumably
contagious for the 72-hour period of
observation. These patients obviously
could not and should not return to
school during this period. We are not
advocating routine initial antibiotic
treatment of patients with suspected
streptococcal pharyngitis, but we do
believe that these clinical benefits
should be taken into consideration in
making the decision of early or
delayed treatment of these patients.
Recently, tests have become com¬
mercially available that permit rapid
laboratory-confirmed diagnosis of
streptococcal pharyngitis by detect¬
ing group A carbohydrate-specific
antigen directly on the throat swab."
These tests require only several min¬
utes to perform and are relatively
inexpensive. If the sensitivity and
specificity of these tests are con¬
firmed to correlate well with throat
culture results, it may soon be possi¬
ble to have immediate laboratoryconfirmed diagnosis in patients sus¬
pected of having streptococcal
pharyngitis, documenting the need
for immediate antibiotic therapy. The
need to perform a throat culture with
its cost, the cost of the bacitracin
disk, or sérologie means for specific
growing would be obviated. The oneto three-day delay in reporting the
results of these procedures would no
longer be necessary, and in those
cases where the throat culture would
have been reported positive, the sec¬
ond physician visit for antibiotic
treatment would be averted. In addi¬
tion, the clinical, public health, and
economic benefits we have shown to
result from initial or early antibiotic
treatment would also be realized.
This study was approved by the Tripler and
Madigan Army Medical Centers' Institutional
Review Boards.
Both the antibiotic and the placebo prepara¬
tions were provided by the Eli Lilly Research
Laboratories, Indianapolis.
References
1. Wannamaker LW: A penicillin shot without
culturing the child's throat. JAMA 1976;235:913\x=req-\
914.
2. Ferrieri P: Treatment of group A streptococcal pharyngitis: Reflections on glue and other
things. JAMA 1981;246:1813-1814.
3. Pantell RH: Pharyngitis: Diagnosis and
management. Pediatr Rev 1981;3:35-39.
4. Brink WR, Rammelkamp CH Jr, Denny
FW, et al: Effect of penicillin and aureomycin on
the natural course of streptococcal tonsillitis
and pharyngitis. Am J Med 1951;10:300-308.
5. Brumfitt W, Slater JDM: Treatment of
acute sore throat with penicillin. Lancet 1957;
1:8-11.
6. Nelson JD: The effect of penicillin therapy
on the symptoms and signs of streptococcal
pharyngitis. Pediatr Infect Dis 1984;3:10-13.
7. Merenstein JH, Rogers KD: Streptococcal
pharyngitis: Early treatment and management
by nurse practitioners. JAMA 1974;227:1278\x=req-\
1280.
8. Breese BB: A simple scorecard for the
tentative diagnosis of streptococcal pharyngitis.
AJDC 1977;131:514-517.
9. Flacklam RR, Padula JF, Thacker EC: Presumptive identification of group A, B, and D
streptococci. Appl Microbiol 1974;27:107-113.
10. Charney E, Bynum R, Eldredge D: How
well do patients take oral penicillin? Pediatrics
1967;40:188-197.
11. Winer BJ: Statistical Principles in Experimental Design, ed 2. New York, McGraw-Hill Co,
1971, pp 559-571.
12. Peter G, Smith AL: Group A streptococcal
infections of the skin and pharynx. N Engl J
Med 1977;297:365-373.
13. American Heart Association Committee
on Rheumatic Fever: Prevention of rheumatic
fever. Circulation 1977;55:1-4.
14. Di Sciascio G, Taranta A: Rheumatic fever
in children. Am Heart J 1980;99:635-654.
15. Breese BB, Disney FA, Talpey WB: The
prevention of type specific immunity to streptococcal infections due to the therapeutic use of
penicillin. AJDC 1960;100:353-359.
16. Ayoub EM: Diagnosis of streptococcal
pharyngitis: Non-culture methods, in Management of Pharyngitis in an Era of Declining
Rheumatic Fever, Columbus, Ohio, Report of the
86th Ross Conference on Pediatric Research.
Columbus, Ohio, Ross Laboratories, 1984, pp 65\x=req-\
71.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of British Columbia Library User on 06/16/2015abstract/397144