The New England
Journal of Medicine
Copyright, 1961, by the Massachusetts Medical Society
Volume 265	SEPTEMBER 21, 1961	Number 12
CONTROLLED STUDIES OF STREPTOCOCCAL PHARYNGITIS IN A PEDIATRIC 
POPULATION*
1. Factors Related to the Attack Rate of Rheumatic Fever
ALAN C. SIEGEL, M.D.,f ELOISE E. JOHNSON, M.D., t AND GENE H. STOLLERMAN, M.D.§ 
CHICAGO
 
PROMPT and adequate penicillin therapy of
pharyngitis due to Group A streptococci has proved effective in preventing primary attacks of rheumatic fever in military populations.1'2 Such treat¬ment has been widely recommended for the control of rheumatic fever in the civilian population as wel1.3
The attack rate of rheumatic fever after such in¬fections has been determined primarily from studies of epidemic, exudative pharyngitis or scarlet fever.'" Approximately 3 per cent of these infections have been followed by rheumatic fever.? Within a given popu¬lation, however, this rate has varied directly with the degree of the host's immune response to strep¬tococcal disease'
In recent years there have been reports that sug¬gest, but do not yet prove, that rheumatic fever may occur less frequently after the endemic form of strep¬tococcal pharyngitis that is usually encountered in civilian medical practice.9,1° Moreover, some pedia¬tricians who practice in areas where the socioeconomic level is high have questioned whether or not the risk of rheumatic fever in these populations justifies the intensive and sustained antibiotic therapy of strep¬tococcal sore throat that has been recommended rou¬tinely for prevention of initial attacks of rheumatic fever.11 It has also been pointed out in Great Britain" that the risk of rheumatic fever after sore throat in civilian populations may be too small to justify thera¬peutic recommendations that have been based pri¬marily upon experience in military populations.
The present study was undertaken when prelimi¬nary observations suggested that the incidence of
*From the departments of Pediatrics and Medicine and the Strepto-coccal Research Laboratory, Children's Memorial Hospital, and the Samuel J. Sackett Research Laboratories, Northwestern University Medi¬cal School.
Supported in part by grants from the American Heart Association, the United States Public Health Service (Grant 11-4164-C2) and Wyeth, Incorporated.
tAssociate in pediatrics, Northwestern University Medical School; director, Streptococcal Research Laboratory, Children's Memorial Hos-pital.
:Special research fellow, National Heart Institute, United States Public Health Service; instructor in pediatrics, Northwestern University Medical School.
§Associate professor of medicine, Northwestern University Medical School. rheumatic fever was surprisingly low in a large pedi¬atric outpatient clinic in Chicago.13 In view of the need to define the relative merits of giving or with¬holding antibiotics in the management of the naso¬pharyngitis commonly encountered in these children, a controlled study was initiated in July, 1956. This report will show the results of the first four years of this study, and will define the clinical, bacteriologic and immunologic nature of the streptococcal disease encountered in relation to the attack rates of rheu¬matic fever and of glomerulonephritis.
METHODS
Selection of Patients and Plan of Study
Patients with uncomplicated, acute upper-respira¬tory-tract disease who entered the Children's Me¬morial Hospital outpatient department were inter¬viewed and examined by a clinic nurse who was a member of our research team. These children were referred to a special clinic if symptoms or signs of sore throat were present. Admission to the study was limited to patients three to sixteen years of age. The mean age was seven, and the median seven and five-tenths years in this population. Patients were ex¬cluded from the study if they had received antibiotics for their current illness before admission to the clinic.
A group of 7 physicians, who were assigned to this special clinic, participated in the examination of chil¬dren in this study. Clinical signs and symptoms were recorded and graded on standardized data sheets. At the initial examination, a clinical impression of wheth¬er or not the infection was streptococcal was recorded. A culture of the throat was made, and all patients were treated symptomatically and instructed to re¬turn the next day. On the return visit a second cul¬ture of the throat was made. When the initial or second culture was positive for beta-hemolytic strep¬tococci, patients were assigned to one of two groups by a random method of selection based on their clinic chart number. One group received 600,000
 
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org at SUNY UPSTATE MEDICAL CENTER on September 7, 2015. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
From the NEJM Archive. Copyright © 2010 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.
