Abstract : This is the report of a controlled trial to assess the effect of a 4-day course of intramuscular penicillin in acute sore throat with pyrexia. Haemolytic streptococci of Lancefield group A were isolated from the throats of 82 young soldier patients: in 39, group A streptococci were not isolated. The groups were clinically similar and the authors were unable to distinguish streptococcal from non-streptococcal tonsillitis by clinical means. In the streptococcal group penicillin shortened the duration of pyrexia and leucocytosis. The duration of sore throat and oedema of the throat was also lessened, but less markedly. In the non-streptococcal group there was no difference between those receiving penicillin and the untreated. Haemolytic streptococci were reduced in number by penicillin but not eradicated: 4 days after a 4-day course of intramuscular penicillin, 40% of streptococcal cases still produced group A streptococci, and at the follow-up 3 to 4 weeks later there was no difference between the treated and the untreated as regards streptococcal carrier rate. The haemolytic streptococci found after penicillin treatment were still sensitive to penicillin. Penicillin appeared to suppress the rise of antistreptolysin-O titre, but for the prevention of rheumatic sequelae eradication of the streptococci is essential.
The authors quote the opinion of WANNAMAKER. et al. [this Bulletin, 1953, v. 28, 1015) that only a 10-day course of penicillin will achieve this and they conclude that a 4-day course can therefore be expected only to shorten the svmptoms by about 24 hours. Against this must be balanced the risk of inducing drug sensitivity. [This article deals with one of the conditions for which penicillin is most frequently prescribed. It should be carefully studied.] A. B. Christie.
Record Number : 19572701383

Language of text : English

Language of summary : English

Indexing terms for this abstract:

Organism descriptor(s) : man, Streptococcaceae, Streptococcus

Descriptor(s) : allergies, antibiotics, carrier state, control, drugs, effects, fever, follow up, group A streptococci, haemolysis, human diseases, infections, intramuscular injection, military personnel, oedema, penicillins, soldiers, susceptibility, tonsillitis, beta-lactam antibiotics

Identifier(s) : bacterium, edema, hemolysis, medicines, pharmaceuticals, pyrexia

Broader term(s) : Streptococcaceae, Lactobacillales, Bacilli, Firmicutes, Bacteria, prokaryotes, Homo, Hominidae, primates, mammals, vertebrates, Chordata, animals, eukaryotes