8166
The Lancet Saturday 1 March 1980
RANDOMISED CLINICAL TRIAL OF
PERIOPERATIVE CEFAZOLIN IN PREVENTING
INFECTION AFTER HYSTERECTOMY
B. FRANK POLK
MERVYN SHAPIRO
PAUL GOLDSTEIN
IRA B. TAGER
BARBARA GOREN-WHITE
STEPHEN C. SCHOENBAUM
Channing Laboratory and Department of Medicine, Peter
Bent Brigham Hospital, and the Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Boston Hospital for Women, Affiliated Hospitals
Center, Inc., Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
Summary To determine the efficacy of perioperative cefazolin in preventing pelvic and
wound infections after elective non-radical hysterectomy, a randomised, placebo-controlled, double-blind
clinical trial was done. Among 86 patients undergoing
vaginal hysterectomy, those who received three perioperative 1 g doses of cefazolin (44) had significantly
fewer pelvic infections (21% vs. 2%); less standard
febrile morbidity (31% vs. 14%); shorter length of stay
(LOS); and fewer courses of antibiotics postoperatively.
There was no reduction in rate of urinary-tract infection
(UTI) (21% vs. 23%). Among 429 women having abdominal hysterectomy, the 206 who received cefazolin
had significantly lower rates of wound and pelvic infections (21% vs. 14%), UTI (21% vs. 9%), and febrile
morbidity (20% vs. 14%). They also had shorter LOS
and received fewer courses of antibiotics postoperatively.
Use of perioperative cefazolin was not accompanied by more side-effects. Three doses of perioperative cefazolin
seem to be safe, efficacious, and cost-effective in preventing infection after vaginal or abdominal hysterectomy.
Introduction
APPROXIMATELY 700 000 elective hysterectomies are done in the United States each year,!.2 the morbidity-rate being 20-60%, mostly owing to postoperative
infections. 2
Several clinical trials have shown the efficacy of
prophylactic antibiotics in reducing rates of infection
after vaginal hysterectomy,3-9 but only seven welldesigned and well-executed clinical trials have studied
the efficacy of antibiotic prophylaxis for elective abdominal hysterectomy. Four of these seven studies showed a
significant reduction in pelvic and wound infections,3.6.7.10 and three did not.9-12 All seven studies were
small (47-239 participants), and the majority were conducted in hospitals where most patients are cared for
and operated on by residents. Furthermore, the antibiotic was given for 3-7 days in four of these studies, a
duration which is longer than has been recommended
and perhaps is not truly "prophylactic".
Against this background, we began a study in 1975 at
the Boston Hospital for Women, a teaching hospital
where 85% of the patients are cared for and operated on
by surgeons in private practice. We assessed the value of
a three-dose course of intramuscular cefazolin versus
placebo in preventing pelvic and wound infections in
patients undergoing elective vaginal or abdominal
hysterectomy.
Methods
Sample Size Estimation
A random sample of 431 charts of women who underwent
hysterectomy during 1973-74 was reviewed to estimate rates
of infection; these estimates suggested that a sample size of 860
was required to provide a power of 0-80 (with fx=0-03) of
detecting at least a twofold reduction in pelvic and wound infections. Approximately midway through the study it was evident that overall infection rates were substantially greater
than those estimated in the retrospective chart survey; recalculations then showed that a sample size of 500-550 would be
adequate to provide the power indicated above. Drug and
placebo groups were not compared until the study was
completed.
Selection of Participants ’
All patients booked for elective, non-radical, abdominal or
aginal hysterectomy were eligible and were sent a letter
explaining the rationale and procedures of the study. On
admission each patient was interviewed by a member of the
study team. Reasons for exclusion from the study included patient refusal, physician refusal, evidence of active infection at
time of admission, use of any antibiotic within 2 weeks, recent
pelvic surgery (within 2 weeks), and history of immediate
hypersensitivity reaction to penicillin or hypersensitivity reaction to any cephalosporin.
Study Protocol
After informed consent was obtained from eligible patients,
the participants were stratified by menopausal status and type
of hysterectomy and randomly allocated to receive cefazolin or
placebo. Participants, their physicians, and all investigators were blind to the allocation throughout the study.
For each participant the usual admission history was taken,
and the routine physical examination and laboratory tests were
done. In addition, a clean voided urine specimen for quantitative culture, and standard measurements of triceps skinfold
thickness,13 were obtained on admission. Patients received
either cefazolin 1.0 0 g or an equal volume (3 ml) of placebo intramuscularly on being called to the operating theatre (1-2 h
before surgery). Second and third doses were given by the
same route 6 and 12 h after the first dose. Patients and their
records were reviewed daily (except weekends) by the study nurse until discharge, and all data relevant to infection were
438
recorded. Physicians were contacted when further information
was needed. When the indwelling bladder catheter was being
removed, a specimen of urine was obtained from the catheter
for culture. Clean voided urine for culture was obtained on the
day of discharge. Antibiotic susceptibility was tested by the
standard Kirby-Bauer method. 14 6 weeks after discharge a follow-up letter was sent to all participants inquiring about late
infections. Responses suggesting infections were investigated
by calls to physicians.
Definitions
Standardised definitions were used for all end-points.
Standard febrile morbidity.--Oral temperature ??:100.4OF
(37.9&deg;C) on any 2 of the first 10 postoperative days, excluding
the first 24 h after surgery.
Urinary-tract infection (UTIs105 organisms/ml in
quantitative urine culture.
Pelvic cellulitis.-Fever, pelvic pain, and vaginal induration
without localised collection of pus on pelvic examination.
Vaginal cuff abscess.-Fever, pelvic pain, and a collection
of pus in the vaginal cuff, the drainage of which was followed
by improvement in symptoms.
Pelvic abscess.-An abscess shown by laparoscopy, laparotomy, ultrasound, or drainage of pus down the vagina.
Abdominal wound infection.-Such an infection, shown by
fever and abnormal-looking wound, could be classified in seven
ways: (1) pus drained; (2) opened, but no pus drained; (3)
abnormally erythematous; (4) stitch abscess; (5) abnormally
indurated; (6) wound ha;matoma; (7) attending physician
diagnosis without apparent criteria.
Analysis of Data
Differences in rates of infection between drug and placebo
groups were tested for significance by Yates’ corrected X2 test
or Fisher’s exact test. IS Unless otherwise indicated, one-sided
p values are reported for these tests of significance, since we
felt that a protective effect of the placebo could not reasonably
be included in the alternative hypotheses. Differences between
distributions of non-normal data (age, estimated blood loss,
duration of surgery) were evaluated by the Kolmogorov-Smir- nov two-sample test16 or by the log-rank test (length of stay)."
Results
Between February, 1976, and April, 1978, 1511
women underwent non-radical elective hysterectomy. Of
these, 557 (37%) were enrolled in the study, and 515
(34%) completed the study. 52 participants were withdrawn (26 cefazolin and 26 placebo) and started on
therapeutic antibiotics in the operating room by the surgeon, usually because of prolonged or complicated surgery. Reasons for non-participation included patient refusal (302), physician refusal (289), recent antibiotic
therapy (134), drug allergy (74), active infection (9), recent surgery (3), and other (133). This last category
included women admitted not for hysterectomy but for
examination under anaesthesia or exploratory laparotomy, and women who spoke neither English nor
Spanish. Results of the randomisation are shown in
table i. The cefazolin and placebo groups were similar
with respect to age, estimated blood loss, duration of
surgery, proportion on the clinic service, proportion premenopausal, and proportion obese judged by triceps
skinfold thickness 30 mm.13 Drug and placebo groups
were also similar with regard to the indications for
hysterectomy and diagnoses.
For both vaginal and abdominal hysterectomy, the
cefazolin groups had significantly lower rates of pelvic
TABLE I--COMPARABILITY OF CEFAZOLIN AND PLACEBO GROUPS
OF PATIENTS UNDERGOING VAGINAL OR ABDOMINAL
HYSTERECTOMY, AND THEIR RATES OF INFECTION
* Categories of infection are mutually exclusive: (1) patients are
placed in categories according to the hierarchy-pelvic abscess
>wound infection >pelvic cellulitis; (2) 8 patients had more than one
wound or pelvic infection.
t Nos. in parentheses indicate infected wounds which drained pus.
t p = 0.006.
&sect;p<0-03.
and wound infections than the respective placebo groups
(table i). The rate of pelvic infections after vaginal
hysterectomy was 89% lower in the cefazolin group
(21 % vs. 2%; p=0006). For abdominal hysterectomy
the rate of pelvic and wound infections was 33% lower
in the cefazolin group (21% vs. 14%; p<0.05). In the
abdominal hysterectomy series, when the analysis
included only those wound infections from which pus
was drained, a reduction of 42% in rate of pelvic and
wound infections between the placebo and cefazolin
groups was observed (12% vs. 7%; p<005).
Among abdominal hysterectomy patients the placebo
group had a significantly higher rate of UTI (table II)
than the cefazolin group (21% vs. 9%; p<00025). In
contrast, there was no difference in the rates of UTI
between placebo and cefazolin treated patients undergoing vaginal hysterectomy (21% vs. 23%). 51 of the 86
patients undergoing vaginal hysterectomy also had a colporrhaphy (table i), and 18 of the 19 UTIs in the
vaginal hysterectomy group occurred in patients having
vaginal hysterectomy plus colporrhaphy. To explain
these findings, data relating to duration of indwelling
bladder catheterisation were analysed. Patients who underwent abdominal hysterectomy had indwelling unnary catheters for a median of 2 days (range 1-11 days
in both placebo and cefazolin groups. Patients who had a simple vaginal hysterectomy had indwelling urinan
catheters for a median of 1 day (range 1-4 days) in both
placebo and cefazolin groups. In contrast, patients who
had a vaginal hysterectomy with colporrhaphy had indwelling catheters for a median of 6 days (1-11 days 1I1
the placebo group and 5 days (1-10 days) in the cefazolin group.
Rates of standard febrile morbidity were analyse
after the defined infections had been excluded. There
was a significant difference between placebo and cef3’
zolin treated groups for both the vaginal hysterectOIJi’
439
TABLE II-POSTOPERATIVE URINARY-TRACT INFECTIONS AMONG PATIENTS UNDERGOING ABDOMINAL OR VAGINAL HYSTERECTOMY
* Patients with significant bacteriuria in the preoperative urine culture were excluded unless the postoperative culture contained 10
orgamsms/ml of a distinctly different pathogen. t p = NS. t p < 0 - 0025.
patients (31% vs. 14%; p<0.05) and for abdominal
hysterectomy patients (20% vs. 14%; p<0.05).
Distributions of length of stay (LOS) by treatment
group and surgical approach are shown in the accompanying figure. Statistical comparison of these distributions shows a significant reduction in duration of stay in
the cefazolin groups compared with their placebo in
counterparts for both vaginal (p<0-001) and abdominal
(p=O.04) hysterectomy.
For patients having either operation, those given perioperative cefazolin were significantly less likely to
receive subsequent courses of antibiotics while still in
hospital than were patients in the placebo groups (table
III).
The frequency of side-effects, except for pain at sites
of injection, was similar between the placebo and cefazolin groups:
.
Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhoea were recorded for the
first 48 h postoperatively, and rash, for 72 h.
The organisms isolated from UTIs were as follows:
Susceptible gram-positive cocci (including Staphylococ- cus epidermidis, Staph. aureus, and group B streptococcus) did not cause any infections in the cefazolin group.
Escherichia coli and proteus were isolated less often in
the cefazolin group. Klebsiella-enterobacter and enterococci were isolated with similar frequency in each group.
Finally, there was no notable increase in isolation of
non-fermenting gram-negative bacilli which frequently cause nosocomial UTI. The proportions of
gram-negative bacilli which were resistant to the cephalosporin-class disc were 2/34 (6%) for the placebo group
and 9/20 (45 % ) for the cefazolin group (p=O. 000 1).
6 week follow-up data were collected on 508 of the
515 study participants. Overall, 32/170 (19%) of all
post-hysterectomy infections were first diagnosed after
Proportion of patients remaining in hospital by day of hospital
admission.
discharge from hospital. The proportions were identical
for vaginal and abdominal hysterectomy patients, and
for placebo (18%) and cefazolin (18%) treatment
groups. These late infections accounted for 21% of
wound infections (11/53); 31% of cases of pelvic cellulitis (8/26); 57% of cuff abscesses (4/7); the only pelvic
abscess; and 10% of all UTIs (8/84). ’
TABLE HI&mdash;&mdash;COURSES OF ANTIMICROBIALS GIVEN TO PATIENTS
AFTER VAGINAL OR ABDOMINAL HYSTERECTOMY AND
PERIQPERATIVE PLACEBO OR CEFAZOLIN .
440
Discussion
Our data confirm the significant reduction in rates of
pelvic infection after vaginal hysterectomy observed in
seven of the eleven prospective, randomised, placebocontrolled, and double-blind studies.3-9 In fact, the four
other studies which did not show a statistically signifi- cant reduction had lower rates of infection in the antibiotic-treated group, but their samples were smallY.18-20
None of the four "negative" trials had a power as great as 80% of finding a 50% reduction in pelvic-infection B,
rate, a failing which is common among published "negative" clinical trials.21
Of the seven published clinical trials of antibiotic
prophylaxis in women undergoing elective abdominal
hysterectomy which have been prospective, randomised,
placebo-controlled, and double blind, four showed a significant reduction in pelvic and wound infections in the
group receiving antibiotics,3.6,7,1O and three were "negative". 9,11,12 Again, these three "negative" trials showed
a trend in favour of antibiotics, and two of them had
small sample sizes. We found a 33% reduction in pelvic
and wound infection rates if all wound infections were
included, and a 42% reduction if only wounds draining
pus were included. These reductions are statistically
significant.
In both vaginal and abdominal hysterectomy groups,
patients receiving cefazolin had significantly lower rates
of standard febrile morbidity, received fewer therapeutic courses of antibiotics, and had shorter hospital stays.
Although the clinical significance of fever without infection is not certain, the economic and clinical implications of reducing overall antibiotic usage and shortening
hospital stay are readily apparent.
Cefazolin significantly reduced postoperative bacteriuria in the abdominal hysterectomy group, but not in
patients undergoing vaginal hysterectomy. The lack of
efficacy was probably due to the longer duration of catheterisation in the subgroups which had a colporrhaphy at the time of vaginal hysterectomy. Although this may
suggest that continuing antimicrobial prophylaxis for
the duration of catheterisation might be efficacious,
other investigations have yielded inconsistent results,22
and such a practice is unlikely to be cost-effective. Not
unexpectedly, a great proportion of the bacteriuria
isolates was resistant to cephalosporins. None of the
isolates was multiply-resistant, and there was no
increase in infections caused by hospital flora such as
pseudomonas and serratia.
The occurrence of infections after discharge from hospital in 6% of patients is noteworthy, since it accounted
for 19% of all defined postoperative infections, including
UTI. The similarity in rates in patients receiving cefazolin and placebo dispelled the suggestion that prophylactic antibiotics might simply suppress and delay postoperative infections. Although some studies have noted
the appreciable number of postoperative infections
which are manifest only after discharge from hospital,23-27 most clinical trials of prophylactic antibiotics do
not include routine follow-up in their design. Late
follow-up is important for surgeons and hospital epidemiologists in order to establish true rates of nosocomial infection.
The antibiotic of choice for prophylaxis of patients
before hysterectomy is not known. Most studies have
used a cephalosporin, while one study each has evaluated carbenicillin," metronidazole,1O and penicillin G,’
The large number of species of potential pathogens in
the vaginal flora makes the choice difficult, but there is
no evidence that it is necessary to use a regimen which
is effective against all such organisms. In the only evaluable clinical trial which compared two regimens with
placebo, Grossman et al. found no significant difference
in infection rates between groups of vaginal hysterectomy patients receiving cefazolin or penicillin.9 Comparative trials are necessary to determine the optimum
prophylactic regimen.
Appropriate timing of the administration of the antimicrobial is important. Experimental data shows that
the antibiotic is best started before surgery so that adequate serum and tissue levels are attained by the time of
surgery.28 Of equal importance is the fact that there is
no evidence that prolonging the administration beyond
24 h is necessary or efficacious.29,30 Doing so will increase cost, risk of toxicity, and rate of emergence of
resistant organisms.
Further analysis of risk factors for post-hysterectomy
infection may enable us to identify patients who are at
higher risk than average, so that selective administration of antimicrobial prophylaxis would be possible. At
present, however, we believe that the routine administration of an appropriate antibiotic at the appropriate
time is safe, efficacious, and cost-effective in preventing infections after elective vaginal or abdominal
hysterectomy.
We thank Ms Diane Straney for programming assistance, Dr Bernard Rosner for statistical advice, and staff of the Boston Hospital for
Women for encouragement and cooperation. The study was funded bv
Eli Lilly & Co.
Requests for reprints should be addressed to B.F.P., Channmg
Laboratory, 180 Longwood Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
U.S.A.
REFERENCES
1. Bunker JP. Elective hysterectomy: pro and con. N Engl J Med 1976, 295:
264-68.
2. Ledger WJ, Child MA. The hospital care of patients undergoing hysterecto- my: an analysis of 12 026 patients from the Professional Activity Study
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1973; 117: 423-33. 3. Allen JL, Rampone JF, Wheeless CR. Use of prophylactic antibiotic in elective major gynecologic operations. Obstet Gynecol 1962; 39: 218-24. 4. Breeden JT, Mayo JE. Low dose prophylactic antibiotics in vaginal hysterectomy. Obstet Gynecol 1974; 43: 379-85.
5. Lett WJ, Ansbacher R, Davison BL, et al. Prophylactic antibiotics for
women undergoing vaginal hysterectomy. J Reprod Med 1977, 19: 51-54
6. Jennings RH. Prophylactic antibiotics in vaginal and abdominal hysterectomy. South Med J 1978; 71: 251-54.
7. Holman JF, McGowan JE, Thompson JD. Perioperative antibiotics in major
elective gynecologic surgery. South Med J 1978; 71: 417-20.
8. Mendelson J, Portnoy J, DeSaint Victor JR, et al. Effect of single and multidose cephradine prophylaxis on infectious morbidity of vaginal hysterectomy. Obstet Gynecol 1979; 53: 31-35.
9. Grossman JH, Greco TP, Minkin MJ, et al. Prophylactic antibiotics in gynecologic surgery. Obstet Gynecol 1979; 53: 537-44.
10. Appelbaum PC, Moodley J, Chatterton SA, et al. Metronidazole in the
prophylaxis and treatment of anaerobic infection. S Afr Med J 1978. 54.
703-06.
11. Roberts JM, Homesley HD. Low-dose carbenicillin prophylaxis for vagina
and abdominal hysterectomy. Obstet Gynecol 1978; 52: 83-87.
12. Ohm MJ, Galask RP. The effect of antibiotic prophylaxis on patients un
going total abdominal hysterectomy. I. Effect on morbidity. Am J Or
Gynecol 1976; 125: 442-47. 13. Seltzer CC, Mayer J. A simple criterion of obesity. Postgrad Med 1965, 38
101-07.
14. Bauer AW, Kirby WMM, Sherris JC, et al. Antibiotic susceptibility test
by a standardized single disk method. Am J Clin Path 1966, 45: 493-9
15. Snedecor GW, Cochran WG. Statistical methods. 6th ed. Ames, Iowa
State University Press, 1967.
441
16. Siegel S. Nonparametric statistics for the behavioural sciences. New York:
McGraw Hill, 1956.
17. Peto R, Pike MC, Armitage P, et al. Design and analysis of randomized clinical trials requiring prolonged observation of each patient. II. Analysis and
examples. Br J Cancer 1977; 35: 1-39.
18. Ledger WJ, Sweet RL, Headington JT. Prophylactic cephaloridine in the
prevention of postoperative pelvic infections in premenopausal women
undergoing vaginal hysterectomy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1973; 115:
766-74.
19 Bivens MD, Neufeld J, McCarty WD. The prophylactic use of keflex and keflin in vaginal hysterectomy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1975; 122: 169-72.
20 Ohm MJ, Galask RP. The effect of antibiotic prophylaxis on patients undergoing vaginal operations. I. The effect on morbidity. Am J Obstet Gynecol
1975, 123: 590-96. 21 Freiman JA, Chalmers TC, Smith H, et al. The importance of beta, the type
II error and sample size in the design and interpretation of the randomized
control trial. N Engl J Med 1978; 299: 690-94. 22. Chodak GW, Plaut ME. Systemic antibiotics for prophylaxis in urologic surgery: a critical review. J Urol 1979; 121: 695-99.
23. Cruse P. Infection surveillance: Identifying the problems and the high-risk
patient. South Med J 1977; 70 (suppl. 1): 4-7.
24. Mathews DD, Agarwal V, Ross H. A randomized controlled trial of a short
course of cephaloridine in the prevention of infection after abdominal hysterectomy. Br J Obstet Gyn&aelig;col 1978; 85: 381-85.
25. Gilmore OJA, Martin TDM, Fletcher BN. Prevention of wound infection
after appendicectomy. Lancet 1973; i: 220-22.
26. Bates T, Down RHL, Houghton MCV, et al. Topical ampicillin in the prevention of wound infection after appendicectomy. Br J Surg 1974; 61:
489-92.
27. Donovan IA, Ellis D, Gatehouse D, et al. One-dose antibiotic prophylaxis
against wound infection after appendicectomy: a randomized trial of clindamycin, cefazolin sodium and a placebo. Br J Surg 1979; 66: 193-96.
28. Burke J. Effective period of preventive antibiotic action in experimental incisions and dermal lesions. Surgery 1961; 50: 161-68.
29. Ledger WJ, Gee C, Lewis WP. Guidelines for antibiotic prophylaxis in gynecology. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1975; 121: 1038-45.
30. Chodak GW, Plaut ME. Wound infections and systemic antibiotic prophy- laxis in gynecologic surgery. Obstet Gynecol 1978; 51: 123-27.
PLATELET-MEMBRANE FATTY ACIDS,
PLATELET AGGREGATION, AND
THROMBOXANE FORMATION DURING A
MACKEREL DIET
W. SIESS
B. SCHERER
B. B&Ouml;HLIG
P. ROTH
I. KURZMANN
P. C. WEBER
Medizinische Klinik Innenstadt der Universit&auml;t,
Ziemssenstrasse 1, 8000 M&uuml;nchen 2, West Germany
Summary Eicosapentaenoic acid (C20:5&ohgr;3), which
is present in high concentration in certain salt-water fish, may reduce the incidence of cardiovascular disease in Greenland Eskimos by reducing
platelet aggregation and adhesion.1 Changes in platelet
and plasma fatty acids, platelet aggregation, and thromboxane (TX) formation were studied in 7 healthy White
men who had been on a mackerel diet for 1 week. Platelet aggregation and TX synthesis after low-dose collagen
stimulation in platelet-rich plasma were reduced. This
could be due to the marked change of the ratio of C20:5
to arachidonic acid (C20:4&ohgr;6) in platelet membranes.
When the men were on the mackerel diet, their C20:5
level in platelet membranes and in plasma increased and
that of C20:4 dropped. Both fatty acids were released
during platelet aggregation. The reduction in the
amount of C20:4 liberated and/or a diminished conversion of C20:4 to TXA2 by competitive inhibition of the
platelet cyclo-oxygenase by the released C20:5 could be
responsible for the decreased platelet aggregation.
Introduction
GREENLAND Eskimos have a low incidence of cardiovascular disorders, favourable lipid and lipoprotein
levels in their plasma, and a bleeding tendency which
may be the result of reduced platelet aggregation.’ Their
intake of monounsaturated and co-3 polyunsaturated
fatty acids is high and that of linoleic and arachidonic
acids is low. Both their plasma and platelet lipids have
a similar fatty-acid pattern to that present in their diet.’ 1
Eicosapentaenoic acid (C20:5w3) seems to be the
most important of the dietary fatty acids because of its
anti-aggregatory effect,2,3 which results most probably
from competitive inhibition of formation of pro-aggregatory arachidonate (C20:4M6) metabolites.4 In addition,
C20:5 may be converted to a prostacyclin (PGI) of the
3-series whose biological properties are similar to those
ofPGIz.3,4
Changing the dietary fatty acids to those taken by
Greenland Eskimos may prevent certain cardiovascular
disorders in Western communities. Therefore, we studied
the effect of a fish diet on plasma and platelet fatty-acid
composition, thromboxane (TX) formation, and platelet
aggregation in healthy White men. We chose a mackerel
diet, because (1) this fish has a high content of C20:5,
and (2) a change in the fatty-acid composition of human
plasma lipids occurs after a mackerel diet. 5
Subjects and Methods
7 healthy White men, who had received no medication in the
preceding 3 weeks, were put on a mackerel diet. The diet consisted almost exclusively of mackerel in two forms (stewed and
smoked). The daily mackerel intake was 500-800 g, which
resulted in a consumption of 7-11 g ofC20:3. Practically all
other forms of proteins and lipids were eliminated from the
diet, but carbohydrate and fluid intakes were not restricted. A
pilot study with 3 persons over 2 weeks had shown that considerable changes of plasma and platelet fatty acids occurred
within 3 to 6 days after starting the diet. Therefore, studies on
platelet aggregation, TX synthesis, and platelet fatty acids
were done 3 days and 1 day before, and on the third and sixth
day after starting, the mackerel diet.
Citrated blood was taken from fasting subjects and immediately centrifuged at 150-200 g for 5 min to get platelet-rich
plasma (PRP). To obtain a constant good platelet yield from
blood (50-60%) the g numbers were varied for each sample
and were lowered during the mackerel diet. Platelet-poor
plasma (PPP) was prepared by centrifugation of resting blood
at 2000 g for 15 min. For platelet aggregation studies and TX
measurements platelets in PRP were adjusted to 250 000/pl
PRP with autologous PPP. Platelet aggregation was measured
according to the method of Born6 by the use of a ’LaborAggregometer’ (Fresenius, Bad Homburg, FRG). The change
in light transmission after addition of aggregating agents was
recorded as a percentage, 100% corresponding to a change of
0-14 optical density. The following aggregating agents were
tested at pre-determined times between 40 and 90 min after
blood sampling: collagen-1, 2, and lOf1-g/ml PRP (HormChemie, Munich, FRG); arachidonic acid-1-8 mmol/l;
adenosine diphospate (ADP)-l and 2-3 mol/1; and 1-adrenaline-1-500 mol/1 (all from Serva, Heidelberg FRG).
TX measurements were made in connection with the platelet-aggregation studies. TXB2, the stable hydrolysis product of
TXA2, was measured by radioimmunoassay, after acidification
and organic solvent extraction of the samples. We used a specific TXB2-antibody (a gift from L. Levine, Brandeis University,
Waltham, Mass., USA), standard TXB, (a gift from Dr J.
Pike, Upjohn Company, Kalamazoo, USA), and 3H-TXB2
(New England Nuclear, Boston, USA).