British Journal of Obstetrics and Gymecology
December 1977. Vol84. pp 894-897
A DOUBLE-BLIND TRIAL OF SINGLE-DOSE CHEMOPROPHYLAXIS
WITH CO-TRTMOXAZOLE DURING TOTAL ABDOMINAL
HYSTERECTOMY
BY
D. D. MATHEWS, Consultant Gynaecologist
Sheppey General Hospital, Sheppey, Kent
HELEN Ross, Consultant Microbiologist
A 11 Saints ’ Hospital, Chu tham , Kent
AND
J. COOPER, Medical Adviser
Clinical Department, Wellcome Foundation Ltd, Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire
Summary
Thirty patients received 10 ml co-trimoxazole and 29 a placebo by intravenous
infusion during one hour from induction of anaesthesia for total abdominal
hysterectomy. The incidence of postoperative urinary tract infections was
significantly lower in patients who had received co-trimoxazole. Co-trimoxazole
was also found to inhibit postoperative colonization of the upper vagina with
Escherichia coli. The incidences of postoperative pyrexia (38 “C or over) and
both early and late abdominal wound abscess formation were almost identical in
the two groups of patients.
THE incidence of morbidity following total
abdominal hysterectomy has been reported
to be as high as 41 per cent (Allen et al, 1972).
According to Garrod (1975) there is now solid
evidence that bacteria implanted in wounds at
the time of operation can be killed by ‘a few
doses’ of a suitable bactericidal antibiotic and
short term chemoprophylaxis has been employed
successfully in general surgery by Bernard and
Cole (1964), Polk and Lopez-Mayor (1969)
and Evans and Pollock (1 973). In gynaecological
surgery, three doses of cephaloridine have
been shown to be as effective as a much longer
course in the prevention of morbidity after
vaginal hysterectomy (Ledger et al, 1975)
but most studies of the use of chemoprophylaxis
with abdominal hysterectomy (Allen et al, 1972;
Rosenheim, 1974; Willis et al, 1975; Ohm and
Galask, 1976) have involved prolonged
administration.
Co-trimoxazole is a broad spectrum antibacterial agent with bactericidal activity against
Gram-negative organisms. Because of its dual
mode of action against the bacterial folate
metabolic pathway, its effectiveness is not
dependent upon cell division which may be
delayed for some hours after inoculation of a
bacterium. It is known to be particularly
effective in small dosage in preventing urinary
tract infections (O’Grady et al, 1973) and has
been shown to have some effect against anaerobic
organisms such as Bacteroides fragilis (Phillips
and Warren, 1974), currently believed to be
responsible for most cases of pelvic infection
following gynaecological surgery (Sweet, 1975).
Especially as it is available in a form suitable
for intravenous infusion, it seemed to be a
particularly appropriate antimicrobial agent
for short term use in the prevention of infection
following gynaecological surgery.
894 
CO-TRIMOXAZOLE CHEMOPROPHYLAXIS TRIAL 895
PATIENTS AND METHODS
Patients being given appointments to be
admitted for abdominal hysterectomy during
1975 and 1976 were invited to participate and
only volunteers were included. Patients in
whom prophylactic antibiotics were considered
either essential or definitely contraindicated
and patients with a history of sensitivity to
sulphonamides or co-trimoxazole were excluded.
The co-trimoxazole and placebo were both
supplied in random order in consecutively
numbered boxes each containing two 5 ml
ampoules of apparently identical fluid. Each
patient on the trial received the contents of
the two ampoules diluted immediately before
use in 250 ml Dextran 70 in normal saline as
an intravenous infusion given during 60 minutes
from the induction of anaesthesia. Each 5 ml
ampoule of co-trimoxazole contained 400 mg of
sulphamethoxazole and 80 mg of trimethoprim.
Immediately before the final preparations for
surgery, a catheter specimen of urine and an
upper vaginal swab using a Cusco’s speculum
were taken and sent to the laboratory for
culture.
Preoperative vaginal preparation was with
Bonney’s blue. Abdominal skin sterilization
was with iodine in 70 per cent spirit. The
operations were performed under general
anaesthesia either by the consultant or another
member of the team with the consultant
assisting. Surgical catgut was used for all
internal ligatures and sutures. The skin was
approximated with metal clips and the abdominal
wound covered with a dressing of the appropriate
size. The vagina was not swabbed or the bladder
catheterized after operation.
The use of therapeutic antibiotics during
the postoperative period was avoided if possible.
Temperature and pulse rate were recorded at
least twice daily, and more often if elevated.
Swabs from any discharged pus were sent to
the laboratory in Stuart’s transport medium.
A high vaginal swab and mid-stream specimen
of urine were collected from each patient on
the second and sixth postoperative days. The
skin clips were removed on the sixth day.
All patients remained in hospital at least seven
days.
In the laboratory, swabs were inoculated on
blood and McConkey agar and into Robertson’s
cooked meat broth and cultured both aerobically
and anaerobically. Leucocyte counts were done
on uncentrifuged urine which was then plated
on blood and McConkey agar using the semiquantitative loop method. Only growths of over
10 000 organismslml were reported. Identification
of organisms was by Minitek combined with
standard methods. Antibiotic sensitivities were
done using Multo Discs on Oxoid DST with
lysed horse blood added.
The trial was approved by the local Hospital
Ethical Committee after the supply of the placebo
had been approved by the Medicines Division
of the Department of Health and Social Security.
RESULTS
Fifty-nine patients took part in the trial,
30 receiving co-trinioxazole and 29 the placebo.
There were no fatalities up to the time of
follow-up six weeks after operation and no
hypersensitivity reactions to either preparation.
The two groups of patients from whom
these results were obtained had been shown to
be similar with regard to age, weight, frequency
of nasal pathogens, incidence of previous
abdominal surgery, type, length and fat depth
of incision, gross pelvic pathology and surgical
procedures undertaken.
In both co-trimoxazole and placebo groups
there were 12 patients in whom a maximum
temperature of at least 38 “C was recorded
on any two of the first seven postoperative
days. A maximum pulse rate of at least
IlO/minute on any two of these days was
recorded in nine patients who had received
co-trimoxazole and 10 who had received the
placebo.
The incidences of abdominal wound, pelvic
wound and urinary tract infection are shown
in Table I. Wound infection was diagnosed
by the observation in inpatients, or history in
patients who had already returned home, of
the sudden discharge of a volume of pus. Urinary
tract infection was diagnosed in hospitalized
patients when either the second or sixth day
routine mid-stream specimen of urine contained
50 or more leucocytes/mm3 in the presence
of a significant bacteriuria (over 10000
organisms/ml). The urinary tract infections
shown after discharge from hospital were
diagnosed and treated by general practitioners. 
896 MATHEWS, ROSS AND COOPER
TABLE I
Incidence of abdominal wound, pelvic wound and urinary
tract infections*
Number of patients
Placebo Infection co- trimoxazole
Abdominal wound
Hospital 3 2
Home 4 5
Hospital 3
Home 1 1
Hospital li 9i
Home 1 5
Pelvic wound -
Urinary tract
* See text for definitions.
t Difference is statistically significant (x2 = 6.45:
Pt0.025).
The only case of preoperative urinary tract
infection, due to a co-trimoxazole-sensitive
Proteus inirabilis, was in the co-trimoxazole
group. The single bacteriologically proven case
occurring after operation in this group was
due to a co-trimoxazole-resistant coagulasenegative staphylococcus.
Table I1 shows the bacteria isolated from
the upper vagina immediately before operation
and on the second and sixth postoperative
days. The most notable differences are in the
frequencies with whish Escherichia coli were
cultured. In co-trimoxazole treated patients
their frequency of isolation was reduced to
zero on the second day while in placebo treated
patients it was increased making the difference
between the two groups statistically significant
at this time. Even on the sixth day no E. coli
were cultured from patients who had received
co-trimoxazole while in patients who had
received the placebo their incidence of isolation
had returned to the preoperative level.
No patient required antimicrobial agents
before the third postoperative day and in only
two patients in each group were they used
before the sixth day.
DISCUSSION
It is clear from the above results that the
major benefit derived fron single dose chemoprophylaxis with co-trimoxazole during total
abdominal hysterectomy was a striking reduction
in the incidence of postoperative urinary tract
infection. This protection of the urinary tract
TABLE TI
Bacteria cultured from the upper vagina before and after operstiori
Co-trimoxazole group Placebo group
Number Number Number Number
of resistant to of resistant to
patients co-t rimoxazole patients co-trimoxazok
Preoperative
Escherichirr coli
Proteas species
Stnphylococcus aiireiis
Bncteroides
Second postoperative day
Escherichirr coli
Klehsiellrr specie;
Haemolytic streptococcus ‘G’
Sixth postoperative day
Escherichia coli
Staphylococcus aureus
Haemolytic streptococcus ‘G’
Streptococcus viridans
Atypical coliform
3
1
1
-
4
1
1
-
* Difference is statistically significant x2 = (6.06: P<0.025). 
CO-TRIMOXAZOLE CHEMOPROPHYLAXIS TRIAL 897
was probably effected partly by excretion of
the drug in the urine and partly by the secretion
of trimethoprim by the vaginal epithelium
(Stamey, 1975) resulting in reduced colonization
of the introital area by E. coli.
Secretion of trimethoprim by the vaginal
epithelium is also the most likely explanation
for the complete inhibition shown in the cotrimoxazole group of the usual postoperative
colonization of the upper vagina with E. coli
described by Ohm and Galask (1976) and
illustrated here in the placebo group. Comparison
with the study of Ohm and Galask (1976)
suggests that a single dose of co-trimoxazole
is much more effective in this respect than
prolonged administration of cephalosporins.
This may have a bearing upon the incidence
of pelvic wound infection after abdominal
hysterectomy.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to Dr Felisbert D’Souza and
Dr M. A. Hassan for their expert surgery and
help with the clerking of the trial, to Sister
Stableford and her staff for their invaluable
assistance in the ward and to Mr Abery, Chief
Technician, and his staff for their work on the
bacteriological specimens.
REFERENCES
Allen, J. L., Rampone, J. F., and Wheeless, C. R. (1972):
Bernard, H. R., and Cole, W. R. (1964): Surgery, 56, 151.
Evans, C., and Pollock, A. V. (1973): British Journal of
Garrod, L. P. (1975): British Medical Journal, 4, 561.
Ledger, W. J., Gee, C., and Lewis, W. P. (1975):
American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
121, 1038.
O’Grady, F., Kelsey Fry, I., McSherry, A,, and Cattell,
W.’ R. (1973): Journd of Inf2ctious Diseases, 128,
S652.
Ohm, M. J., and Galask, R. P. (1976): American Journal
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 125, 442 and 448.
Phillips, I., and Warren, C. (1974): Lancet, 1, 827.
Polk, H. C., and Lqpez-Mayor, J. F. (1969): Surgery, 66,
97.
Rg$enheim, G. E. (1974): Americiln Journal of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, 119, 335.
Stamey, T. A. (1975): Journgl of Infectious Diseases,
3, 131.
Sweet, R. L. (1975): American Jownal of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, 122, 891.
Willis, A. T., Ferguson, 1. R., Jones, P. H., Phillips, K. D.,
Tearle, P. V., Brentnall, G. L., Bancroft-Livingsten,
G. H., Selegrnan, S. A,, Lush, C., Wilkinson, D.,
Sutch, I., and Kilbey, C. (1975): Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, 1, 393.
Obstetrics and Gynecology, 39, 218.
Surgery, 60, 434. 