Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=iobs20
Download by: [Australian Catholic University] Date: 10 August 2017, At: 18:32
Acta Obstetricia et Gynecologica Scandinavica
ISSN: 0001-6349 (Print) 1600-0412 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/iobs20
Metronidazole prophylaxis to prevent infections
after total abdominal hysterectomy
Lars Henriksson, Ann-Sofie Colling-Saltin, Göran Frick, Stig Kullander, LarsErik Sandholm, Jan Ursing & Åke Cederberg
To cite this article: Lars Henriksson, Ann-Sofie Colling-Saltin, Göran Frick, Stig Kullander, LarsErik Sandholm, Jan Ursing & Åke Cederberg (1998) Metronidazole prophylaxis to prevent infections
after total abdominal hysterectomy, Acta Obstetricia et Gynecologica Scandinavica, 77:1, 116-119
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00016349808565824
Published online: 03 Aug 2009.
Submit your article to this journal
View related articles
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 
Acta Obstel Gynecol Scand 1998; 77: 116-119
Printed in Denmark - all rights reserved
Copyright 0 Acra Obsrer Gynecol Scand 1998
A& Obstetricia et
Gynecologica Scandinavica
ZSSN 0001-6349
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Metronidazole prophylaxis to prevent
infections after total abdominal hysterectomy
From the Departments of 'Gynecology and Obstetrics, in Malmo, Helsingborg, Karlskrona and of 2Clinical Bacteriology in
Malmo and Karlskrona, Sweden
Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 1998; 77: 116-119. O Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 1998
Methods. In a randomized double-blind study, 134 patients were given 500 mg metronidazole
as an intravenous infusion immediately before operation for abdominal total hysterectomy
and again 8 hours later and 124 patients received placebo.
Results. There was more wound infection, postoperative hospitalization was longer and the
sedimentation rate on the sixth postoperative day was significantly higher in the placebo
group. There was no difference in postoperative temperature. Postoperative wound infections
occurred in 12% in the placebo group and 6% in the metronidazole group. Eight percent in
the total material had urinary tract infections, the diagnosis was based on urine cultures.
Conclusions. Prophylaxis with intravenous infusion of metronidazole is recommended in total
hysterectomies.
Key words: duration of postoperative hospital stay; hysterectomy; metronidazole; postoperative infections; sedimentation rate
Submitted 8 November, 1996
Accepted 16 August, 1997
Abdominal hysterectomy is associated with a high
risk of postoperative infection. The frequency of
serious infection has been reported to be >20% (1,
2), it is often an anaerobic infection (5) deriving
from the vaginal or fecal flora. Several investigations have shown that metronidazole or tinidazol given prophylactically has reduced the frequency of anaerobic infections in abdominal total
hysterectomies (1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7), but opinions continue to differ about its efficacy1. Prophylactic metronidazole has been administered either by mouth
or rectum, and more recently intravenously, which
achieves a high and effective serum concentration
After the preparation of this manuscript our attention was
drawn to a publication by Mittendorf et al. 1993 (8) showing
in a metaanalysis a pronounced effect of metronidazole in prevention of serious infections associated with total abdominal
hysterectomies. It also has a high efficacy in vaginal hysterectomies (9, 10).
of the drug, with tissue levels in the genital organs
equivalent to serum levels (5).
The chief objective of the multi-center study reported here was to ascertain whether metronidazole as sole drug given as an intravenous infusion
during and after total abdominal hysterectomies
prevents postoperative infection. The trial was placebo-controlled because antibiotic prophylaxis is
not at present used before hysterectomy in Sweden.
Material and methods
The study was conducted as a randomized, controlled and double-blind study at the Departments
of Gynecology and Obstetrics in Malmo, Helsingborg and Karlskrona. It was estimated that 300
women needed to be included in the investigation
to show a statistical difference with a frequency of
about 20% wound infections in the placebo treated
group. Three hundred and sixteen women were ac8 Acta Obstef Gynecol Scand 77 (1998)
Downloaded by [Australian Catholic University] at 18:32 10 August 2017 
Prophylactic nzetronidazol 1 1 7
tually randomized in the study. Women scheduled
for hysterectomy were randomized for inclusion in
the study groups, unless they had received antimicrobial treatment in the 2 weeks before operation; had a known allergy for metronidazole; were
receiving treatment with anticoagulating drugs
(warfarin) or disulfiram (Antabuse); were habitual
alcohol abusers or were breastfeeding.
The study was performed according to Declaration of Helsinki Guidelines and approved by the
National Board of Health and Welfare and the local ethics committee at each center. The patients
were provided with printed information concerning the nature and purpose of the study and gave
their oral consent to participate.
The patients received either metronidazole or
placebo. The patients were allocated to either treatment or placebo by means of three data generated
randomization lists, one per clinic. The wards were
issued with bottles containing metronidazole or
placebo for infusion that were labeled identically
and only distinguished by a code number. Metronidazole (500 mg) or placebo was given as an infusion during the induction of anesthesia and
again 8 hours later, 100 ml being infused over 20
min (a rate of 5 mllminute). Any adverse reactions
which could be connected with metronidazole were
noted.
The patient washed herself all over with Hibiscrub and took a shower in the afternoon and in
the evening before the operation. The same procedure was repeated the next morning just before
operation. Before the operation, the vagina was
cleansed with a solution of chlorhexidine (0.5 mgl
rnl), and the abdominal wall was cleansed with alcohol and chlorhexidine (0.5 mglml).
The technique of the total hysterectomy was the
same at all clinics, except that the pelvis was
drained to the vagina by a rubber-Ftube in every
case at the Karlskrona clinic.
Infection criteria
a) Abscess in abdominal wall or pelvis, eventually spontaneously ruptured. Pus was to be needle
aspirated for bacteriological culture.
b) Fever 238S°C in combination with a tumor.
There should be no appreciable decrease in hemoglobin concentration.
c) Fever r38S°C in combination with an erythema of the wound.
d) A temperature of 2 38.5"C at any time during
the first six days after operation, with other causes
such as thrombosis, pneumonia, or urinary tract
infection being excluded.
The patients were specially checked for wound infection on the third and the sixth days after the operation, the doctor responsible noting any clinical
signs of wound infection. If the patient had fever,
the result of complementary investigations such as
chest X-ray, bacteriological culture from urine and
the wound, phlebography or other relevant tests
were noted. None of the investigators knew if the
patient had got metronidazole or placebo.
Other investigations
Before the operation, urine culture and the sedimentation rate were checked. After the operation
the sedimentation rate was checked on the sixth
day. The morning and afternoon temperature were
checked every day.
Bacteriological methods
Material for culture from vaginal or abdominal
wounds in infected cases were collected with cotton
swabs or by puncture, samples being delivered to
the laboratory in Stuart's transport medium for
aerobic culture, or in prereduced medium or in the
syringe for anaerobic culture. Specimens were processed in the bacteriological laboratory within six
hours. Standard methods were used for culture
and identification of isolates. Anaerobic incubation was achieved with anaerobic jars. Mid-stream
specimens were used for urine culture.
Statistical evaluation
Statistical differences were evaluated with Pearson,
Chi-square and Mann-Whitney tests. Values of
p < 0.05 were considered to be statistically significant. The results were judged from the one-tailed
tests because placebo wasn't expected to change infection rate or postoperative hospitalization. The
primary analysis was based on data referring to
all cases randomized from whom information was
available. Beside that secondary analyses excluding
the patients listed in Table I were accounted.
Results
Three hundred and sixteen patients were randomized in the study. One hundred and fifty-seven
got placebo and 159 metronidazole. Two hundred
and ninety-one protocols could be evaluated statistically (the primary material). One hundred and
forty-one received placebo and 150 received metronidazole. In total 58 patients were excluded according
to the exclusion criterias given in Table I. Of the 258
remaining patients (the secondary material), 124 received placebo and 134 metronidazole. The results
are given in primary- and secondary material.
There were no statistical differences in weight or
O Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 77 (1998)
Downloaded by [Australian Catholic University] at 18:32 10 August 2017 
1 18 L. Henriksson et al.
age between the placebo and metronidazole groups.
Nor were there any differences in body-weight between infected and non-infected patients, either in
the prophylaxis group or in the placebo group. Of
the 3 16 randomized women, pre-operative urine
cultures were performed in 274, of which 21 (7.7%)
harbored bacteria (>108/1), 20 being treated with
antibiotics beside metronidazole and thus excluded
secondary analyses because the treatment might
suppress a postoperative infection.
There were no differences between the daily mean
temperature or the aggregate mean temperature in
the two groups before or after the operation.
Preoperatively there was no difference in sedimentation rate between the two groups but on the
sixth day after the operation the sedimentation rate
was highest in the placebo group (Table 11).
In the placebo group 12. I%, and in the metronidazole group 6.0%, got a postoperative infection.
There was an equal distribution between lower
pelvis and abdominal wall infections (Table 111).
Placebo patients were treated longer at hospital
than the metronidazole patients specially as regards
hospitalization more than 12 days. This shows the
infections of the placebo group being more serious
than the metronidazole group (Table IV).
The treatment is evenly distributed among the
three centers, the effect is similar and there are no
interactions between treatment and hospital. All patients left hospital cured of their postoperative infections.
Table I. Drop outs
Placebo Metronidazole Total
Patients case record could not be
traced
Hysterectomy not performed
Wrong prophylaxis
Antibiotic treatment peroperatively
Antibiotic treatment for fever not
caused by postoperative wound
infection
Antibiotic treatment for urinary tract
infections (UTI) postoperatively
Protocol not used
Radical hysterectomy performed
Postoperative hematoma
Total 32 26 58
Table 11. Sedimentation rate. Placebo/Metronidazole
Primary analysis Secondary analysis pvalue
Preop 12/14 mrn 11/13 mm ns.
Day 6 56/50 mm 55/49 mm 0.04510.015
Table Ill. Postoperative infection. Piacebo/Metronidazole. Infected cases
Secondary
Primary analysis analysis pvalue
Evaluated patients 1411150 12411 34
Number of infected
patients 1 719 1 618 0.03510.028
Percent of 12.116.0 1 2.916.0
Lower pelvis infections 915 814
Abdominal wall infection 814 814
Table IV. Postoperative hospitalization. Placebo/Metronidazole
Secondary
Primary analysis analysis pvalue
Total number of patients 1341146 1 2311 34
Days of hospitalization
(mean) 8.817.9 8.517.8 0.01 510.035
Hospitalization more than
12 days 1 716 1 213 0.04510.005
In our investigation only two patients treated
with metronidazole have been cultured from their
wounds. In one case there was a growth of aerobes,
in the other case there were a mixture of aerobes
and anaerobes. The latter case had a fulminant abscess of the abdominal wall which was drained.
The culture of the wound showed Gardnerella vaginalis, anaerobe Gram-positive cocci and Bacteroides sp. Combinations of aerobes and anaerobes
occurred in the placebo group. Like in other investigations bacteria commonly found were
Bacteroides fragilis and other Bacteroides sp.,
Staphylococcus epidermidis, Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus group B and G and Echerichia
coli. In our investigation, Bacteroides sp. were isolated seven out of nine times in cultures in placebotreated patients but only once in the metronidazole-treated group. As only two metronidazole patients with wound infections had bacteriological
cultures from their wounds, it is difficult to estimate the real frequency of Bacteroides sp. in this
group. No blood culture was positive.
No adverse effect in form of neuropathy or
other negative reactions of the metronidazole
prophylaxis was noted.
Discussion
Metronidazole is known to be effective against anaerobic infections (8). A prerequisite for a good
effect is that an adequate concentration is maintained during a sufficiently long time. Bacteria
commonly causing postoperative wound infections
after total hysterectomies belong to the genera Fusobacterium, Clostridium, Bacteroides, PeptoO Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 77 (1998)
Downloaded by [Australian Catholic University] at 18:32 10 August 2017 
coccus, Veillonella and Acidaminococcus. These
have a minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) of
between 6-8 pg/ml (1 1).
Five hundred milligrams of metronidazole intravenously every 8 hours gives an average MIC of 14
pghl(7.3-20 pg/ml), the elimination half-life being
7.24 1 .O (standard deviation) hours (8). The concentration of >7 pg/ml is then maintained for an average of 15 hours postoperatively if metronidazole is
given at induction of narcosis and again 8 hours
later. Theoretically the dose given in this investigation should prevent postoperative wound infection.
Only a few investigations have been published
where intravenous infusion of metronidazole has
been used in total hysterectomies. These often represent a combination of vaginal, peroral or intravenous administration of metronidazole (5, 6, 1 Z),
and the material often consists of a combination of
abdominal and vaginal hysterectomies, prolapse
operations and other gynecological operations (12,
13). In these studies a beneficial effect was reported,
though they contained a smaller number of patients
than ours.
The only published report of intravenous metronidazole prophylaxis given only to abdominal total
hysterectomies (14) gave a shorter duration of postoperative temperatures > 37OC for the metronidazole group. In addition, the anaerobe content in the
vagina was lower in the metronidazole group,
though this did not result in any statistical differences in the frequency of infection, number of patients requiring antibiotics, or duration of postoperative hospitalization. In their investigation the
patients received 500 mg metronidazole as an infusion three times, once every sixth hour starting at
the operation. Compared with this investigation
(14) we did not find a difference in temperature between the two groups but there were effects both on
infection rate and hospitalization.
Anaerobes may be found alone or with aerobes in
90% of pelvic abscesses (1 1). In published investigations where metronidazole was administered perorally or as an intravenous infusion, the frequency
of infection is generally low and postoperative infection is seldom caused by anaerobes (4,5,6).
By international comparison (l,2, 3) we thus report a low frequency of postoperative wound infections, 12% after abdominal total hysterectomies. Intravenous infusion of 500 mg metronidazole at the
operation and again eight hours later will decrease
both this frequency of wound infections and the
postoperative hospitalization time significantly to
6%. The sedimentation rate the sixth day after operation was lower in the group of prophylaxis than in
the control group but there was no difference in
postoperative temperature among the groups.
Infection prophylaxis with intravenous infusion
Prophylactic ~~zetuonidazol 1 19
of metronidazole in total hysterectomies therefore
could be recommended.
References
Seligrnan SA. Metronidazole in obstetrics and gynaecology.
J Antimicrob Chemother 1978; 3: Suppl C, 51-4.
Hughes TBJ, Framton J, Begg HB, Kahn MS. The prophylactic effect of a short course of intravenous metronidazole
during gynaecological surgery. The Royal Society of Medicine. International congress and symposium series. Number 18, Metronidazole. Proceedings of the 2nd International Symposium on Anaerobic Infections held in Geneva,
25-27 April 1979; pp. 207-10.
Heginbotham D, Rutherford AM. Metronidazole in the
prophylaxis of anaerobic infections in gynaecological
surgery: A trial. NZ Med J 1979; 89: 246-8.
Jackson P, Ridley WJ, Pattison NS. Single-dose metronidazole prophylaxis in gynaecological surgery. NZ Med J 1979;
89: 243-5.
Karhunen M. Tinidazole in the prophylaxis of postoperative gynaecological infections. Dissertation. Acta Univ Oul
D 132, Obstet Gynecol 9, Oulu, Finland.
Kauppila A, Ruatiainen H, Tuimala R. Prevention of post
hysterectomy infection with a combination of preoperative
vaginal and perioperative intravenous administration of
rnetronidazole. Ann Chir Gynaecol 1983; 72: 214-17.
Manthorpe T, Justesen T. Metronidazole prophylaxis in abdominal hysterectomy. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 1982;
61: 243-6.
Mittendorf R, Aronson MP, Berry RE, Williams MA, Kup
elnick B, Klickstein A et al. Avoiding serious infections associated with abdominal hysterectomy: a meta-analysis of
antibiotic prophylaxis. Am J Obstet Gynecol Nov 1993; 169
(5): I 1 19-24.
Queck M, Miss E, Berle P. Lokale Applikation von Metronidazol vor Hysterektomie - Einflul3 auf infektiose Morbiditat. Eine prospektive Studie. Geburtshilfe Frauenheilkd
1991;,51 (10): 839-42.
Queck M, Berle I? Lokale Infektionsprophylaxe mit Metronidazol vor vaginaler Hyterektomie - vergleichbarer Effekt gegentiber einer systemischen Prophylaxe? Gynakol
Geburtshilfliche Rundsch 1992; 32 (3): 155-8.
Houghton GV, Thorne PS, Smith J, Tempelton R, Collier
J, Moesgard F et al. The pharmacokinetics of intravenous
metronidazole. The Royal Society of Medicine. International congress and symposium series. Number 18. Metronidazole. Proceedings of the 2nd International Symposium
on Anaerobic Infections held in Geneva 25-27 April, 1979;
pp. 3540.
Popkin DR, Martinez LA, Carswell A. Metronidazole in
the prophylaxis of anaerobic infections in gynaecologic
surgery. Surgery 1983; 93: 2: 180-4.
Kahn MS, Begg HB, Framton J, Hughes TB. A comparative study of the prophylactic effect on one dose and two
doses intravenous metronidazole therapy in gynaecological
surgery. Scand J Infect Dis 1980; 26: 1 15-17.
Vinclette J, Finkelstein F, Aoki FY, Ti TY, Ogilvie RI,
Richard GK et a]. Double-blind trial of perioperative and
intravenous metronidazole prophylaxis for abdominal and
vaginal hysterectomy. Surgery 1983; 93: 2: 185-9.
Address for correspondence:
Lars Henribson, M.D., Ph.D.
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
University Hospital UMAS
S-2 14 01 Malrnij
Sweden
0 Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 77 (1998)
Downloaded by [Australian Catholic University] at 18:32 10 August 2017 