SUSHIL MITTAL ET AL 55
Tahle 2. Results of Culdurentesis and Findings at Lanarotomv
Culdocentesis Culdocentesis
No. of positive negative
Lnpnrotoiin diagnosih cases Yo. % No. %
Tuhal rupture 30 39 (97.5) 1 (2.5)
Intact tuhal pregnancv and (20)
Tuhal ahortion 32 2X (X7.5) 4 (12.5)
tuhal molc 20 16 txm 4
'rOtai 92 x3 I901 9 (101
characteristic clinical presentation. Adopting this procedure as an additional diagnostic aid in acute tubal rupture would mean loss of time, where the latter is often
at a preniiuni. However, culdocentesis even though not
totallv accurate, is of immense help in certain controWe conclude that culdocentesis cannot replace good
clinical judgement in cases of acute tubal rupture, nor
is it a procedure which can provide a correct result when
the amount of bleeding into the peritoneal cavity is minimal or localized. However, the procedure is of great
value when the diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy is in doubt;
unnecessary surgery can be avoided and conservative
measures with reevaluation can be carried out when
appropriate.
Rclfi.rcwces
I. LeBolt SA, Grimes DA, Cates WJr. Mortaliy from abortion and
childbirth: are the populations comparable? JAMA 1982; 248:188- 191 ._.. 2. Barnes AB, Wennberg CN, Barnes BA. Ectopic pregnancy: incidence and review of determined factors. Obstet Gynecol Surv
1983: 38:345-356.
verxial anti equivocal cases. The present study has shown
culdocentesis to be accurate in 87% of cases of tubal
3. Thorburn JEK, Janson PO, Lindstedt G. Early diagnosis of ectopic
pregnancy: a review of 328 cases of a five-year period. Acta Obstet
Gvnecol Scand ~..~ ~.~ ~ 1983: ...~. 62:543-547 . - .
abortion and 80% of 'intact' tubal pregnancies respectivelv, whereas Bobrow (4) reported an accuracy of55%
in his series. The high percentage of false negative results
in other series could be due to minimal or localized collections blood in the peritoneal cavity or to faulty
technique.
3. Borrow ML, Winkelstein LB. The value of centesis as adiagnostic
procedure in ruptured ectopic gestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol
1955: 69: 101- 109.
5. Armstrong JT, wills SH, M~~~ J, Lauden AE. Ectopic pregnancy: a review of 481 cases. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1959; 72364-370.
6. Douglas CP. Tuba1 ectopic pregnancy. Br Med J 1963; 2:838-841.
7. Lucas C, Hassim AM. Place of culdocentesis in the diagnosis of
ectopic pregnancv. Br Med J 1970 1:200-202.
Aust NZ J Obstet Gynaec
(1985) 25: 55
Single Dose Tinidazole Prophylaxis in Hysterectomy
A. H. Crosthwaite', Allison B. Hurse', I. A. McDonald3, Helen M. Miles', and E. R. Pavillard4
The Row1 Melboirrrie Hospital, Victoria
Swwuarv: The results of this randomized double blind, placebo controlled trial of
a single oral dose of 2 g tinidazole or placebo approximately 12 hours before hysterectomy
showed the incidence of infective morbidity in patients who received placebo was 12.2%
compared with 1.9% in patients who received tinidazole, (p = 0.045). The mean serum
concentration of tinidazole at the time of surgery was 35 mcg/ml, which was well in
excess of the minimum concentration required to inhibit all of the 95 anaerobes isolated
in this study. Serum tinidazole concentration remained adequately inhibitory for at least
24 hours after surgery. The ability of tinidazole prophylaxis to reduce further our already
low rate of febrile morbidity was considered a worthwhile gain. It is now Unit policy to
give this agent prophylactically to all patients if the integrity of the vagina is likely to
be breached at the time of surgery.
Postoperative infective complications, especially infected pelvic collections, are common in patients following hysterectomy. The results of 20 trials of various
I. Associate Urologist.
2. Microbiologist.
3. Senior Gvnaecologist.
7. Microbiologist.
5. Director of Microbiologv
~iJ~~~'.~/~lJ~f~/l~ff~'~~ f(Jl
Mr. A.H. Crosthwaite.
Suite 6, Private Consulting Rooms.
The Roval Melbourne Hospival, Victoria 3050
antibiotic prophylaxis regimens in vaginal hysterectomies, extending back to 1966, indicate that, in the
absence of prophylaxis, infection-related complication
rates may consistently approach 40-50% (1). Polk's evatuation of 11 randomized, double blind, placebo controlled studies in which prophylactic antibiotics were
administered for only 48 hours in the perioperative
period, showed 10 of the 11 trials had significantly fewer
infections in patients undergoing vaginal hysterectomy
(2). In 1974, Willis et a1 (3) reported the effectiveness
of metronidazole for the prevention and treatment of bac- 
56 AUST. 4ND N.2. JOL'RNU OF OBSTETRICS AND GYN~ECOI OGY
teroides infections in gynaecological patients. Other
studies have since confirmed its efficacy (4) and that of
related drugs such as tinidazole (5.6).
Without the use of prophylactic antibiotics, the incidence of infective morbidity after hvsterectomv in the
Gynaecology Unit of The Royal Velbourne Hospital was
less than that reported elsewhere (6), including some
Units which routinely give prophvlactic antibiotics to
their patients. To decide if it was justified to introduce
prophylaxis as standard cover for all patients undergoing
hysterectomy in our Unit, where the sepsis rate was already low, a randomized double blind, placebo controlled
trial was set up. Trial patients received either 7 g tinidazole or a placebo approximatelv 12 hours before surgery. Tinidazole was chosen because it is active against
vaginal anaerobes likely to contaminate surgical wounds
or haematomas (7), it is easily administered as a single
preoperative oral dose and maintains a bactericidal serum
level during the surgical procedure and in the immediate
postoperative period. It is also a relativelv low cost drug
with few side-effects.
METHOD
One hundred women, undergoing either abdominal or
vaginal elective hysterectomy, participated in our double
blind, randomized, placebo controlled trial. Trial patients
received either 2 g of tinidazole (4 500 mg tablets), or
placebo, as a single oral dose approximatelv 12 hours
before operation.
Posioperufive ciinicui uss~wttwt~?.
ative infective morbidity:
The following criteria were used to assess postoperA postoperative fever was considered significant
if the temperature exceeded 37.8"C on 2 consecutive days (excluding the first 24 hours after operation) or was raised longer than 24 hours.
The presence of a pelvic collection demonstrated
on bimanual examination was considered to be a
haematoma, unless it was associated with a significant fever or a purulent vaginal discharge, when
it was considered to be an infected pelvic collection.
Specitnen collecrioti
Swabs were taken from the vaginal vault at the following times: (i) before the administration of tinidazole
or placebo 12 hours before operation; (ii) on the operating
table before the operative preparation of the vagina; (iii)
one week after operation.
Swabs were also taken from the vaginal suture line
before closure of the peritoneum in patients undergoing
abdominal hysterectomy, or from the vaginal suture line
after closure in patients undergoing vaginal hysterectomy.
Swabs were placed in anaerobic transport containers
and cultured within 4 hours. Blotd was taken lor tinidazole assay before administration of dose, immediately
bet'ore the induction of anaesthesia. and 74 and 48 hours
atter operation. Sera were separated and stored at - 70°C
bel'ore assa? .
Cdtrirc,.s
Smabs ucre plated on fresh prereduccd inedia in an
anaerobic-handling enclotire. Parallel culture5 \<ere iticubated in air plus IOsk CO,. Culture, isere inctihatc.d
ti)r 5 dabs before bcing discarcled.
Anaerobes were screened for resistance on horse blood
agar to discs containing penicillin (2 units). oxpall
(75 mg) and kananivcin ( 1.000 mcg), according to the
method described bv Draper and Barrv (8). Organisms
resistant to all 3 of these agents, and which failed to
produce pigment when grown on a Ivsed blood medium,
were considered to be Herc.tc~rctir/c.\ of the 'tragilis group'.
This classification was supported hv gas-liquid chroniatographv profile (GLC). The remaining isolates were
grouped as Btrcwroir/.\ .s/vl"(.ic,\ 'other than t'ragilis group'.
or as F'ir.rohcic,rc,rirrrti spc.c.ic,.\ according to the GLC
proflle.
Anaerobic isolates were maintained in cooked meat
niediuni and batch-tested for tinitfaiole sensitivitv. The
minimum inhibitorv concentration (MIC) of' tinitlaiolc
was measured bv an agar tfilution method (9). using il
medium developed bv Wilkins antl Chalgrcn, which incorporated concentrations oi' 35, 6 antl 3 tiicgiliil
tinitlazole.
Serum tinidazole levels were riicawrcd bv a well cliffusion technique using 150 miii petri dishes containing
45 mi of the test medium surface sectled with a laboratorv
strain of C/os/ric/irrtti ,\poro,yc'tic'.\. Stantlard concentrations ot 10. 5, -3.5, I .75 antl 0.625 mcg tinitlamle/iiil.
prepared in antibiotic-free poolctl hurnan %era WiS I.
were useti to construct the stantlard curve\. Patient sertiiii
samples were diluted in PHS to tall within !hi\ range of
stantlard concentrations. Plates wcrc incuhatccl ;in;icrc)bicallv tor IX hours at 37°C. Saiiiplcs antl standartls wcrc
assayed in duplicate and a numhcr were turthcr ass;~vcd
hv high pressure liquid chroniatographv (HPIX') to confirm the hioassav riiethotl.
RESI:l.?S
One huntlrcti paticnts were cvaluatcd. Fil'tv-one p;cticnrs
received tinidaiolc antl 49 received p1;rceho. The iiicun
age of patients in thc trcatctl group was 53 vears. arid
of those in the placebo group 55 vears. The tlistrihution
of patients is shown as follows:
Tinitlamlc group (n = 5 I )
Vaginal hvsterectoinv 17
Abtloniinal hvstcrcctoiii\ 31
Vaginal hvstcrcctoniv I6
A btloniinal h\ 5tercctoniv 33
The occurrcncc of intcctctl pelvic collections antl wpticaemia was less in patient5 who received a prophblactic
close of tinitlamlc ( I out of 51 in the iinitl;i/olc group
Placeho group (n - 49) 
A. H. CROSTHWAITE ET AL
'Table 1. Incidence of Pelvic Sepsis or Septicaemia
'Tpe 01 'Tiniclamle Intccti\c Placebo Int'ecti\'e
h! rtcrcc'toiii! 5 I pmcnts coinplication 19 patients complication
Ahtloiiiinal 31 Nil 33 - 1
Ttlt;ll 1 h
Vaginal 17 I Ih 3
(P = 0.035)
compared with 6 out of 3Y in the placebo group). This
tlit'fercncc. was significant (p = 0.045) (table I).
No patient who received tinidazole and had a vaginal
hvsterectomv developed an infected pelvic collection and/
or septicacmia. However. 3 placebo group patients developed infected pelvic collectiom after vaginal hvsterectornv and another became septicaeniic 3 davs
postopcrativclv. In women who underwent abdominal
hvsterectoniv, 1 patient in the tinidazole treated group
~levcloped an infected pelvic collection. compared to 2
in the placebo group. Two patients who received tinida~olc. before operation developed pelvic haematomas,
but these did not become infected.
C'rr/trrl.c.s
Complete sets of specimens were received for 49 of
51 patients in the tinidazole group and for 45 of 49
patients in the placebo group. Onlv patients from whom
complete sets of swabs were received were included in
the bacteriological analvsis.
Thirteen of 49 patients in the tinidazole group were
shown to be harbouring anaerobic Gram-negative bacilli
before operation. but onlv in 2 patients were these organisms recoverable from vaginal swabs taken at the time
of operation. Fourteen of 45 placebo group patients harboured anaerobic Gram-negative bacilli before operation
and Y patients had positive cultures at the time of operation. Anaerobic Gram-negative bacilli were isolated from
the seventh dav postoperative swabs in 13 of 49 patients
who received tinidazole, compared with 24 of 5 1 patients
who were given placebo. There was no measurable overgrowth bv aerobic microorganisms.
Anaerobic Gram-negative bacilli were recovered from
the vaginal suture line swabs of onlv 2 patients. Both
patients had received tinidazole, one before abdominal
hvsterectomv, the other before vaginal hvsterectomv.
From each, small numbers ofBtrcrcw)irIc~.s of the 'fragilis
group' were isolated in pure culture. No other anaerobic
organisms were isolated from vaginal suture line swabs.
Aerobic organisms were recovered from the vaginal suture line swabs of 15 patients, of whom 1 I underwent
abdominal hvsterectotnv, and 14 vaginal hvsterectomv.
In most instances onlv scant growth was recorded.
A total of 95 isolates of anaerobic Gram-negative bacilli from all sources were characterized as follows:
Bric~rc~r-oic/c.s 'fragilis group' 68 (75%)
Bac.rc~roitIc,s 'other than fragilis group' 2 1 (21%)
Fztsobiic.rcrirriii spccics 6 (3%)
0 12 24 36 40 60 4 # 29 Tinidazole Operation
Time post-dose (hours)
Figure I. Mean berum concentrations of tinidazole after a single oral
dose ot' 2 g. Horizontal line indicates maximum concentration required to inhibit all vaginal anaerobes isolated.
Witiimtiii Iiihibirorv Coiicerrfrariorrs and Serum
Tiriir/n:olr Le.ve/s
The minimum inhibitorv concentrations of tinidazole
for all isolates tested were 3 mcg/ml or lower. Figure 1
shows that the serum level of tinidazole was at least twice
this value during the first 24 hours after operation in all
patients who had received tinidazole 12 hours before
surgerv. The mean level at the time of operation was
35 mcg/ml.
DISCUSSION
In operations carrving a risk of bacterial contamination,
prophvlactic antibiotics must be appropriate for likely
contaminating organisms and be present in the serum in
bactericidal concentrations at the time of surgery. A short
perioperative course should be used and any antibiotic
chosen should be other than one reserved for resistant
bacterial strains. It is essential that the benefits expected
of the prophvlaxis outweigh anv disadvantages and/or
side-effects of the agent selected (10).
Vaginal surgerv carries a high infection risk ( 1,2,6).
No preoperative topical preparation solution can completelv decontaminate the vagina and any surgical procedure in which vaginal integritv is breached necessitates
operating in a contaminated field (1 1 i. Duff and Park
( 1) emphasise that antibiotic prophylaxis is not a corrective for less than adequate patient preparation or less than
adequate surgical techniques. Optimum decontamination, adequate haemostasis. reduction in the volume of
devitalised tissue with avoidance of ligation of large vascular pedicles. and attention to accurate wound closure,
all help to reduce postoperative infective complications.
In our Unit, the overall incidence of infective morbidity
without resort to antibiotic prophvlaxis was approxi- 
58 AUST. AND N.Z. JOURNAL OF OESTETRtCS AND GYNAECOLOGY
mately 12% and less than that reported from many other
centres where prophylactic antibiotics are used regularlv.
Duff and Park (1) and Polk (2) in their thoughtful reviews
indicate that antibiotics may not always be necessarv.
We have attempted to answer this question in respect of
our Unit by setting up the trial reported here. The results
indicat: that, even with a low infective morbidity rate,
it is possible to achieve worthwhile gains if an effective
prophylaxis regimen is introduced.
The 2 g single dose of tinidazole, orally 12 hours before surgery, was easily administered, well tolerated and
did not interfere with preoperative work-up. No sideeffects were observed. Anaerobic Gram-negative bacilli
resistant to tinidazole were not encountered and there was
no measurable overgrowth of aerobic microorganisms in
the lower genital tract.
The carriage of anaerobic Gram-negative bacilli immediately preoperatively was less common in tinidazole
treated patients than in patients receiving placebo, but
the results of individual pre- and peri-operative swabs
were not helpful in predicting those patients who went
on to develop postoperative pelvic sepsis. Anaerobic
organisms were isolated from suture line swabs from only
2 patients; both were from the tinidazole group and neither
developed infection. Two other patients treated with tinidazole developed clinically apparent haematomas, but
neither became infected.
In this study, a tinidazole concentration, many times
in excess of the MIC of tinidazole for likely contaminating
organisms, was present in the serum at surgery and a
level of at least twice the MlC was maintained for 24
hours postoperatively (figure 1 ). A significant reduction
(P = 0.045) in the incidence of postoperative pelvic
sepsis was observed in the group of patients who received
tinidazole (table I).
Experience in this study has shown that a single oral
dose of tinidazole, preoperatively in patients undergoing
elective hvsterectomv and particularlv vaginal hvsterectomv, has effectively decreased the incidence of febrile
niorbiditv after surgerv in our Unit.
AcX.iio~c.letlgi,rrtit.s
We acknowledge the assistance of Pt'izer Ptv. Ltd. for
financial aid with this trial and thank Mrs. Merrv Gcare
for her help in the typing of the manuscript.
We appreciate the cooperation of the staff of the Gvnaecoiogy Unit of The Roval Melbourne Hospital during
this studv and are indebted to Mrs. Mara Carson for
undertaking antibiotic sensitivitv testing and Dr. S Cheng
for performing the statistical analvsis and HPLC tinidazole assav.
Refererirm
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
X.
9.
10.
II.
Duff P, Park RC. Antibiotic prophvlaxis in vaginal hv\terectoni\:
A review. Obstet Gvnecol 19x0: 55 (5 Suppl): 193 S-202 S,
Polk BF. Antimicrobial prophylaxis to prevent niixed bacterial
infection. J Antimicrob Chemother IYXI: X Suppl D:I 15-129.
Willis AT, Bullen CL, Ferguson IR et al. Uetronidarole in the
prevention and treatment of Bacteroides infections in gvnaecological patients. Repon bv a studv group. Lancet 1974: 2:1540-
1543.
Jackson P, Ridlev WJ, Pattison NS. Single dose Metronidarole
prophvlaxis in gvnaecological surgerv. N% Wed J 197Y: XY:243-
245.
Cock5 PS, Munro R, Norton B, Nutting J. Shanker S. Cheng S.
Prospective comparative trial of tinidarole and metrt)ntdamle as
prophylaxis for elective hv\terecromb . Aust N% J Obstet Gvnaecol
1981: 21:116-120.
Seligman SA. Prophylactic oral and intravenous tinidazole in hv\-
terectomv. J Antimicrob Chemother 19x2; 10 Suppl A:XI-X3.
Nord CE. Microbiological properiies 01 tinitlazole: spectruni activitv and ecological consideration\. J Antimicrob Cheniother I9Q:
10 Suppl A:35-42.
Draper DL, Barry AL. Rapid Identification ofBctc.rcwm/c\ /rcryr/i\
with Bile and Antibiotic Dihks. J Clin Micrtihiiil IY77: 5439-443
Wilkins TD. Chalgren S. Medium for Use in Antihiotic Su\ccptibilitv Testine. of Anaerobic Bacteria Antiniiuroh Aacnts Chcmother .I 97k Ik926-92X.
Ledger WJ. Gee C. Lewi\ WP. Guideliner lor Antibiotic Prti.
phvlaxis in Gvnecolog\. Am J Ohstct Gvnccol IY75: 121 lO3X1035.
Thadepalli H. Anacrohic infection\ 01 the lcrnalc gcnital tract
Scand J Infect 1h 1979: (Suppl) (IY):XO-YI 