This article was downloaded by: [University of Otago]
On: 25 July 2015, At: 18:30
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: 5 Howick Place, London, SW1P 1WG
Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ijog20
The Trials of Antibiotic Prophylaxis at
Chelsea Hospital for Women
Elizabeth T. Houanga
a
 Chelsea Hospital for Women, London
Published online: 09 Jun 2015.
To cite this article: Elizabeth T. Houang (1984) The Trials of Antibiotic Prophylaxis at Chelsea Hospital
for Women, Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 5:sup1, S20-S22
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/01443618409075756
PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/termsand-conditions
S20 Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology (1984) 5 (Suppl. 1) S2eS22 Prinredin Great Britain
The trials of antibiotic prophylaxis at
Chelsea Hospital for Women
Elizabeth T. Houang
Chelsea Hospital for Women, London
THE EFFICACY of prophylaxis in abdominal hysterectomy has been much studied but remains controversial. Recently, there have been some detailed
literature reviews on the topic (Berger et al., 1980;
Hirschmann and Inui, 1980; Polk, 1981). By
evaluating studies which have been carried out
scientifically as suggested by Gifford and Feinstein
(1969), that is, prospective, double-blind, placebocontrolled and randomised, the authors of these
reviews report a reduction in the incidence of
complications resulting from infection in nearly a11
the studies. Particularly with respect to the in-,
cidence of postoperative wound infection, this reduction is statistically significant in some reports.
During the period of January 1982 to March 1983,
we assessed the efficacy of prophylaxis, using
ampicillin plus penicillanic acid sulphone (Sulbactam sodium CP45899, Pfizer) or ampicillin plus
metronidazole, in major gynaecological surgery
carried out at our hospital (Study A; Houang er
al., 1984). The results obtained in patients undergoing abdominal hysterectomy will be reported
here. Since November 1983, we have been studying the efficacy of piperacillin in prophylaxis for
abdominal hysterectomy in comparison with the
combination of ampicillin plus metronidazole
(Study B). We also report the preliminary results
of this study.
PATIENTS AND METHODS
Study A. Patients for elective surgery were randomly allocated to 1 of 3 groups:
Group A received a placebo suppository 2 hours
before surgery, followed by penicillanic acid
sulphone 500mg plus ampicillin 500mg i.v.
immediately after induction of anaesthesia;
Group B received a metronidazole suppository
(1 g) 2 hours before surgery followed by ampici!lin
500 mg i.v. immediately after induction of
anaesthesia;
Group C received a placebo suppository 2 hours
before surgery.
The study was so designed that the medical and
nursing personnel would not be aware of the
group allocation of the patients studied. After
surgery, the patients were assessed daily by a
research nurse for the first week or until discharge
if infection occurred, and also at 6 weeks after
discharge in the outpatient clinic. Specimens of
mid-stream urine before the operation and at the
end of urethral catheterisation were routinely
examined microbiologically. Urinary tract infection was defined as the presence of 3.10'
organisms/ml urine. All postoperative infections
were treated according to normal clinical practice.
Infected abdominal wounds were graded as follows: Minor-presence of erythematous induration, discharge of serosanguineous fluid or pus, or
stitch abscess; Major-gaping of at least half the
length of the abdominal wound as a result of
infection. Febrile morbidity was defined when the
oral temperature was elevated above 38 "C on two
separate occasions at least 6 hours apart, excluding the first 24 hours after operation. '
Study B. Patients for elective surgery were randomly allocated into one of the two groups: Group
A received a placebo suppository 2 hours before
surgery followed by 2 g piperacillin immediately
after induction of anaesthesia; Group B received a
metronidazole suppository (1 g) 2 hours before
surgery followed by ampicillin (500mg) i.v. immediately after induction of anaesthesia. Apart
from the group allocation and the antibiotics used,
Study B was carried out in a similar manner to
Study A.
R ES U LTS
One hundred and fifty-eight patients completed Study A. There was no significant difference
in the distribution of age, weight, anaemia
(1 1 .O g/lOO ml), post-menopausal status and types
of operation among the patients in the three study
groups. The Table shows the number of patients
with wound infection, febrile morbidity and postoperative urinary infections. Prophylaxis with
either combination studied significantly reduced
the rates of wound infection and febrile morbidity.
Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:30 25 July 2015 
Houang: Antibiotic prophylaxis trials 521
Table. Double-blind controlled studies of antibiotic prophylaxis in abdominal hysterectomy
Study A Study B
Ampicillin Ampicillin Ampicillin
Sulbactam’ Metronidazole Placebo Piperacillin Metronidazole ~ ~ ~ ~ ~
Patients 51 58 49 23 - 23
Wound infections
2 ; 0 (4%) ; (3%) (25%)t Minor
Major
2
0
Febrile morbidity 2 (4%) 1 (2%) 10 (20%)t 2 2
Postoperative 4 (8%) 8 (1 4%) 7 (14%) 2 (9%) 5 (22%)
urinary infections%
* Penicillanic acid sulphone.
t Ampicillin and Sulbactam versus placebo, P<O.OOl; ampicillin and metronidarole versus placebo, P<O.OOl.
Excludes 2 patients with preoperative urinary infections in each group in study A.
The incidence of postoperative urinary tract was
not affected.
So far, 46 patients have completed Study B. The
preliminary findings are shown in the Table. At
this stage, there does not appear to be any significant difference in the incidence of infections between the two groups.
DISCUSSION
The benefit of prophylaxis in abdominal hysterectomy has not been reported uniformly among
the many studies reported, and Hirschmann and
Inui (1981) suggested that the decision to use
preventive antibiotics should be based on the type
and frequency of postoperative infections that the
surgeons have previously encountered. The results of our study indicate that in our hospital,
prophylaxis reduced postoperative morbidity.
Most importantly, it reduced the incidence of
major postoperative wound infection. The combination of ampicillin and metronidazole is
commonly used to treat infection in gynaecology,
as it offers a wide spectrum of antimicrobial
activity against the anaerobic and microaerophilic
microbial flora of the vagina. Penicillanic acid
sulphone (Sulbactam), a p-lactamase inhibitor, in
combination with ampicillin, offers the same range
of activity, with additional protection against
penicillinase-producing Staph. aureus (Retsema et
al., 1980).
The in vitro spectrum of piperacillin, a semisynthetic penicillin, covers most gram-negative
and gram-positive aerobes and anaerobes (Sweet
et al., 1983). Our preliminary results indicate it is
as effective as the antibiotic combination of ampicillin plus metronidazole in the prevention of
wound infection. In common with most reports in
the literature, the incidence of postoperative urinary tract infection was similar in all the groups.
Single dose peri-operative trimethoprim plus
sulphamethoxazole (Matthews et al., 1977) and
cefuroxime (Jandial et al., 1983) have been reported to reduce postoperative urinary tract infection, but not wound infection. Compared with
major wound infection, postoperative urinary
tract infection can be regarded as a minor complication in most cases, but because of its relatively
high incidence, it represents an important cause of
postoperative discomfort to the patient. It would
therefore be valuable to find an antibiotic which
can be shown to reduce significantly the incidence
of all the postoperative infections.
REFERENCES
Berger S. A., Nagar H. and Gordon M. (1980) Antimicrobial prophylaxis in obstetrics and gynecologic surgery: A critical review. Journal of Reproductive
Medicine 24, 185-190.
Gifford R. H. and Feinstein A. R. (1969) A critique of
methodology in studies of anti-coagulant therapy for
acute myocardial infarction. New England Journal of
Medicine 280, 351-357.
Hirschmann J. V. and Inui T. S. (1980) Antimicrobial
prophylaxis: A critique of recent trials. Reviews of
Infectious Diseases 2, 1-23.
Houang E. T., Watson C., Howell R. and Chapman M.
(1984) Ampicillin combined with sulbactam or metronidazole for single-dose chemoprophylaxis in major
gynaecological surgery. Journal of Antimicrobial
Chemotherapy, in press.
Jandial L., Reid T. M. S. and Jandial V. (1983) Prophylactic cefuroxime in gynaecological surgery. Research
and Clinical Forums 5, 45-52.
Mathews D. D., Ross H. and Cooper J. (1977) A doubleblind trial of single-dose chemoprophylaxis with co- trimoxazole during total abdominal hysterectomy.
British Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology 84,
894-897.
Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:30 25 July 2015 
522 Journal of 0bstetrics.and Gynaecology (1984) 5 (Suppl. 1) S22-S23 Printed in Great Britain
Polk B. F. (1981) Antimicobial prophylaxis to prevent
mixed bacterial infection. Journal of Anrimicrobial
Chemotherapy 8, Supplement D, 115-129.
Retsema J. A,, English A. R. and Girard A. E. (1980)
CP-45,899, in combination with penicillin or ampicillin against penicillin-resistant Staphylococcus, Haemophilus inyuenzae, and Bacteroides. Antimicrobial
Agents Chemotherapy 17, 6 15622.
Sweet R. L., Robbie M. 0. Ohm-Smith M. and Hadley
W. K. (1983) Comparative study of piperacillin versus
cefoxitin in the treatment of obstetric and gynecologic infections. American Journal of Obstetrics and
Gynecology 145, 342-349.
Correspondence should be addressed to: Dr Elizabeth Houang, Chelsea Hospital for Women, Dovehouse Street, London SW3 6LT.
The aetiological role of antibiotic
prophylaxis with hysterectomy in irritable
bowel syndrome
Virginia Alun-Jones, A. J. Wilson, J. 0. Hunter and R. E. Robinson
Departments of Gastroenterology and G ynaecology, AddenbrookeS Hospital,
Cambridge
IRRITABLE bowel syndrome is said to affect 14 per
cent of the population (Thompson and Heaton,
1978) and affects women more frequently than
men. We have shown (Alun Jones et al., 1982;
Hunter et al., 1984) that in two-thirds of cases
presenting in East Anglia the symptoms can be
controlled, both in the short and the long term, by
the detection of specific food intolerances.
Of 122 successive patients with irritable bowel
syndrome presenting to a gastroenterology clinic
at Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge, who were
invited to try dietary management, 88 achieved
dietary control of their symptoms. Review of these
patients’ notes revealed that some patients believed a specific event had caused their disease: 10
(1 1 per cent) attributed it to a course of antibiotics,
11 (12 per cent) to a gastrointestinal infection, 13
(1 5 per cent) to abdominal or pelvic surgery, of
which 7 (8 per cent) specifically mentioned
hysterectomy.
Hysterectomy was thus identified as a potential
cause of irritable bowel syndrome, and lent itself
to further study. Four gynaecologists in Cambridge routinely used metronidazole (Flagyl, May
and Baker) to reduce peri-0-perative sepsis while the
remaining two did not. The drug was administered
in varying doses by various routes. The same
theatres and ward were used by all, and the same
junior staff assisted all six consultants. A prospective study was undertaken of patients undergoing both abdominal and vaginal hysterectomy,
without any change being made to their routine
management. During admission they completed a
questionnaire (Table I) about the frequency and
severity, during the previous 6 weeks, of the
symptoms typical of the syndrome.
Patients who had irritable bowel symptoms
pre-operatively or received other antibiotics or
radiotherapy were excluded. One hundred and
thirteen patients remained, and postal questionnaires were sent out to these 6-8 weeks postoperatively. Thirteen had developed relevant
symptoms after their operation; 12 of these were
among the 74 who had had metronidazole, and
only 1 in the 39 who had not.
A prospective double blind controlled study was
then set up (n = 300). All hysterectomy cases are
eligible except those having vaginal hysterectomy
under the care of one consultant (who wished
them to have co-trimoxazole and metronidazole),
those planned to receive radiotherapy, and the
mentally handicapped. The dose regimen was one
suppository at the time of premedication, one on
the evening of operation and three further doses at
12 hourly intervals. Each patient received suppositories containing 1 g metronidazole (Flagyl) or
placebo. The same questionnaire was in use.
Paired blood samples were taken (during the
operation and on the morning of the last dose) in
24 patients, for metronidazole levels.
Downloaded by [University of Otago] at 18:30 25 July 2015 