Vaginal hysterectomy: cefuroxime, metronidazole or both?
F.M. Kauer, J. Wijma and W.L. Manson
Introduction
The use of antibiotics to decrease the postoperative infection rate in vaginal hysterectomy
is generally accepted. As both aerobic and anaerobic pathogens are involved in post-operative
infections the combination of cefuroxime and metronidazole is frequently used in prophylaxis
[1-3]. Nevertheless, both cefuroxime, like most
other cephalosporins agents with limited activity
against anaerobic flora, and metronidazole,
having purely anti-anaerobic activity, are effectively used in single-agent prophylaxis in vaginal
hysterectomy [4-6].
An animal model has demonstrated that aerobic and anaerobic species act highly synergistic
in creating infections [7]. Single-agent prophylaxis with cefuroxime or metronidazole might be
effective by interfering with either the aerobic or
the anaerobic contribution to this synergism
model. Thus cefuroxime, metronidazole or the
combination of both agents might have similar
results in prophylaxis in vaginal hysterectomy.
We designed a study to compare the efficacy of
these three prophylactic regimens in a prospective randomized double-blind study using clinical,
as well as microbiological criteria. Taking into
account the possible similarity of the three
groups, we expected a large number of patients
to be entered in this study in order to demonstrate differences. To estimate the required
sample size we decided to perform an interim
analysis on the first hundred patients. This report documents these preliminary results.
Methods
Patients
Patients aged 20 and over admitted for vaginal
hysterectomy to the Gynaecological Department
of the Roman Catholic Hospital in Groningen,
were considered to be eligible for the trial.
Patients were excluded when they had a history
of hypersensitivity to cephalosporins or anaphylactic reaction to penicillins, when they had received antibiotics within 48 h before surgery,
when they had evidence of an existing infection
before operation, or when they did not agree to
participate. After randomization patients who
did not have a vaginal hysterectomy - because
the gynaecologist decided to choose abdominal
hysterectomy at operation - were withdrawn
from the trial. Patients were excluded from the
analysis when the result of the pre-operative
urine culture revealed an asymptomatic bacteriuria (/> 10 ~ organisms/ml urine). Patients who
failed to receive the allocated prophylactic regimen in the prescribed way or who received additional antibiotics at operation were also excluded.
Procedure
After admission to the trial, patients were assigned by the hospital pharmacist to receive
either cefuroxime 1,500 mg (group C) or metronidazole 500 mg (group M) or cefuroxime 1,500 mg
plus metronidazole 500 mg (group CM), according to a table of random numbers prepared before
Keywords
Cefuroxime
Drug therapy
Hysterectomy
Metronidazole
Pre-operative care
Dr. F.M. Kauer (correspondence):
Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, Roman Catholic
Hospital Groningen, Van
Swietenlaan 4, 9728 NZ
Groningen, the Netherlands.
Dr. J. Wijma: Department of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology,
University Hospital Groningen,
P.O. Box 30.001, 9700 RB
Groningen, the Netherlands.
Dr. W.L. Manson: Department of
Medical Microbiology, Roman
Catholic Hospital, Groningen;
Regional Public Health
Laboratory, Groningen,
the Netherlands.
Kauer FM, Wijma J, Manson WL. Vaginal hysterectomy: cefuroxime, metronidazole or both?
Pharm Weekbl [Sci] 1990;12(6A):284-8.
Abstract
A randomized double-blind prospective study on the efficacy of single-dose antibiotic
prophylaxis compared cefuroxime versus metronidazole versus the combination of both
agents in vaginal hysterectomy. Overall antibiotic prophylaxis was effective in abscess
prevention (one abscess in 68 patients). In the metronidazole group a significantly higher
grade of morbidity was observed: febrile morbidity 41% versus 4% in the two other groups;
bacteriuria 73% versus 17% in the cefuroxime group, versus 13% in the combined group;
urinary tract infection 23%, versus 0% in the two other groups; post-operative prescription of
antibiotics 41%, versus 0% in the two other groups. Febrile morbidity and bacteriuria
correlated positively with Escherichia coli and Proteus spp. These micro-organisms were
recovered significantly more often from the vagina of patients in the metronidazole group.
Cefuroxime was successful, metronidazole failed in the prevention of minor morbidity. We
could not observe any effect from the addition of metronidazole to the cefuroxime
prophylaxis.
Accepted 22 November 1990.
284 Pharmaceutisch Weekblad Scientific edition 12(6A) 1990 
beginning the study. The assigned antibiotic
regimen was prepared and delivered by the Pharmacy Department in a 100 ml solution, vial and
colour of the solution being indistinguishable.
Patients received the antibiotics by single-dose
intravenous infusion during 5 to 10 min starting
15 min before surgery.
Demographic data and the reason for surgery
were recorded on admission. After operation, the
duration of surgery, volume of blood loss, weight
of the removed uterus and the procedure performed were recorded. In patients having repair
of the anterior vaginal wall, a suprapubic bladder catheter was inserted. This catheter was
clamped starting on post-operative day 5 and removed on post-operative day 7, if no significant
residual urine was collected. In other patients an
indwelling catheter was inserted for 24 to 48 h;
this was repeated if necessary.
Samples of urine were collected pre-operatively
and on days 3 and 8, post-operatively. Urine was
examined microscopically in an unstained wet
film and in a Gram-stained dry film and cultured
quantitatively and qualitatively. Macroscopically distinct colonies were pure cultured and
identified using standard techniques [8] .
Swabs were taken from the ectocervix preoperatively and from the vaginal cuff on days
2 and 7, post-operatively, and were cultured both
aerobically and anaerobically in semi-quantitative and qualitative ways. The patients were
examined daily and clinical signs of infection, adverse reactions to the antibiotics and other postoperative complications were recorded. The observer was unaware of the antibiotics used.
Fever or febrile morbidity was defined as an
axillary temperature exceeding 37.5 ~ on two or
more consecutive days, excluding the day of operation and the following 24 h [9]. An infection at
the operative site in the vagina was diagnosed as
a vaginal cuff abscess if the following signs were
present: fever, pelvic pain, swelling detected by
palpation and/or visualized by ultrasound investigation, and purulent discharge followed by
clinical amelioration [10]. Urinary tract infection
was defined as clinical signs of infection of the
lower urinary tract, in combination with significant bacteriuria (f> 105 colonies/ml urine) and
pyuria (> 25 white blood cells/microscopic field)
in the absence of epithelial cells [11]. Asymptomatic bacteriuria was defined to be significant
bacteriuria (~> 105 colonies/ml urine) in the absence of clinical signs of infection, pyuria and
epithelial cells.
Demographic and clinical characteristics, postoperative morbidity and bacteriologic data were
compared by X 2 test and Fisher's exact test for
dichotomous variables and by Student's t-test for
continuous variables. The differences were considered to be significant at P<0.05.
Agreement to the protocol was obtained from
the local ethical committee before starting the
study. Patients were informed about the trial
and asked to participate. Those who did not
agree received antibiotics according to department policy.
Results
Of the 100 patients admitted for vaginal hysterectomy, 22 were excluded: 5 had a history of
allergy to penicillins or cephalosporins, 14 had
evidence of an existing infection or were receiving antibiotics for other indications and 3 did not
choose to participate. Of the 78 patients who
were assigned to one of the three antibiotic regimens, 10 were disqualified for evaluation: 5 had
entered the trial with asymptomatic bacteriuria
(1 patient in group C, 2 in group M, 2 in group
CM ), in 3 an incorrect antibiotic regimen was
used (1 patient in each group) and on 2 occasions
Table 1
Demographic and clinical characteristics of the antibiotic groups
Cefuroxime Metronidazole Cefuroxime
plus
metronidazole
Number of patients 23
- premenopausal 4
- postmenopausal 19
Mean age (years) (SD) 59 (11)
Mean body weight (kg) (SD) 70 (8)
Mean height (cm) (SD) 163 (6)
Indications for surgery
- prolapse/urinary incontinence 21
- abnormal bleeding 1
- combination of both indications 1
Vaginal hysterectomy
- with colporrhaphy 22
- without colporrhaphy 1
Mean duration of operation (min) (SD) 70 (20)
Mean uterus weight (g) (SD) 68 (35)
Mean blood loss (ml) (SD) 404 (386)
Number of patients with transfusion of blood 5
Mean duration of catheterization (days) (SD) 5 (2)
22
6
16
60 (13)
73 (9)
167 (7)
18
1
3
21
1
77
76
432
7
7
(17)
(37)
(250)
(3)
23
9
14
55 (12)
68 (9)
165 (7)
19
2
2
21
2
78
98
323
5
6
(20)
(60)
(209)
(3)
12(6A) 1990 Pharmaceutisch Weekblad Scientific edition 285 
Table 2
Morbidity (number of patients) in the antibiotic groups
Kind of morbidity Cefuroxime
(n = 23)
Metronidazole
(n = 22)
Cefuroxime
plus
metronidazole
(n = 23)
Febrile morbidity
Vaginal cuff abscess
Urinary tract infection
Significant bacteriuriat
Post-operative antibiotics
i*
0
0*
4*
0*
9
1
5
16
9
1"
0
0*
3*
0*
*Significantly different to the metronidazole group.
tIncluding 5 urinary tract infections.
an abdominal approach was chosen at operation
(1 patient in group M, I in group CM). The remaining 68 patients were evaluable for comparison of morbidity, bacteriology and side-effects.
There were no significant differences in demographic and clinical characteristics of patients in
the three prophylactic groups. These data are
shown in Table 1. The most common procedure
was a vaginal hysterectomy with colporrhaphy
in postmenopausal women.
In the metronidazo]e group significantly more
febrile morbidity (41%) urinary tract infections
(23%) and significant bacteriuria (73%) were observed compared to the two other groups (Table
2). Only one vaginal cuff abscess was diagnosed
in a patient of the metronidazole group. Other infective or non-infective post-operative complications included one haematoma of the vaginal cuff
(group M), two cases of local infection of the abdominal wall around the suprapubic bladder
catheter (1 in group M, i in group CM) and single
cases of threadworm, arthritis of the knee and
local thrombophlebitis of the upper leg (all in
group CM). Only in 3 out of the 11 patients with
febrile morbidity there was a demonstrable
reason for the abnormal temperature, because of
the existence of a vaginal cuff abscess, cuff haematoma or urinary tract infection. In the other
8 cases the period of raised temperature was
never related to any of the documented complications, nor to the moment of transfusion of
blood. Significantly more patients in the metronidazole group, received post-operative antibiotics, being 9 patients. Of these 9 patients, 4
had a urinary tract infection and 5 had asymptomatic bacteriuria, once combined with a vaginal
cuff haematoma. 8 Patients received trimethoprim, in two cases combined with a cephalosporin, and 1 received a cephalosporin only. There
was no difference in the average hospital stay,
being 11.1 days (SD 1.1) in group C, 13.0 days
(SD 3.6) in group M and 11.4 days (SD 2.2) in
group CM. Adverse events directly related to the
prophylactic regimens were not seen in any of
the three groups.
Pre-operatively, no significant difference in the
microbiology of the vaginal fluid was observed
for any micro-organism isolated in the three
prophylactic groups. On day 2 and day 7, postoperatively, Escherichia coli, Proteus spp. and
haemolytic streptococci were cultured significantly more often in the metronidazole group
than in the cefuroxime group (Table 3). A significant difference for the same micro-organisms
was also observed between group M and group
CM on both post-operative sampling days. For
Bacteroides spp. and other anaerobic microorganisms no significant difference was observed
Table 3
Microbiology of the vaginal fluid on the second and seventh post-operative day in the antibiotic
groups (number of patients with positive culture)
Micro-organism recovered Cefuroxime Metronidazole Cefuroxime plus
(n = 23) (n = 22) metronidazole
(n = 23)t
day2 day7 day2 day7 day2 day7
Escherichia coli 2* 6* 15 14 1" 7*
Proteus spp. 0* 0* 6 7 2 1"
Coagulase-negative staphylococcus 5 1 4 2 4 0
Haemolytic streptococcus 0* 2* 5 8 0* 4
Enterococcus 9 6 5 2 5 1
Bacteroides spp. 2 13 1 15 1 10
*Significantly different to the metronidazole group.
tOn day 2 one aerobic culture missing, so n = 22 for aerobes on day 2.
286 Pharmaceutisch Weekblad Scientific edition 12(6A) 1990 
between the culture results from patients in the
different prophylactic groups. We do not report
the culture results of other infrequently isolated
micro-organisms, such as Klebsiella pneumoniae,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus
and Gram-positive anaerobic cocci, because they
bore no relation to morbidity.
The bacteriological data were found to be related to febrile morbidity. The preoperative
samples of vaginal fluid were similar in patients
with and without febrile morbidity. On the
second post-operative day, a significant difference was observed between patients with febrile
morbidity and those without, E. coli, and Proteus
spp. being more often isolated in patients with febrile morbidity. (E. coli positive cultures/number
of patients: 6/11 versus 12/56; P = 0.033. Proteus
positive cultures/number of patients: 4/11 versus
4/56; P = 0.020). The difference for Proteus spp.
persisted until the seventh day. For anaerobic
micro-organisms there was no significant difference on any sampling day between patients with
and without febrile morbidity.
The culture results of the 23 cases of postoperative bacteriuria including the 5 cases of
symptomatic urinary tract infection are presented in Table 4. Among these cultures Proteus
mirabilis was found more often in the metronidazole group. This micro-organism was cultured in
three of the five cases of urinary tract infection,
E. coli was involved in the other two cases.
The bacteriological data of the urine were
found to be related to morbidity, a significant difference being observed between patients with
post-operative bacteriuria or urinary tract infection, and those without: Proteus mirabilis and E.
coli were isolated more often from the urine of
patients with bacteriuria (Proteus mirabilis posirive cultures/number of patients: 7/23 versus
0/45; P = 0.0002. E. coli positive cultures/number of patients: 7/23 versus 0/45; P = 0.0002).
Proteus mirabilis was recovered more often from
the urine of patients with urinary tract infection
(Proteus mirabilis positive cultures/number of
patients: 3/5 versus 4/63; P = 0.006).
Discussion
The observed incidence of one vaginal cuff abscess in 68 vaginal hysterectomies in our study is
in accordance with the literature [3 12], and indicates that major morbidity is reduced effectively
by antibiotic prophylaxis. Even the incidence of
1 cuff abscess in the 22 hysterectomies with
metronidazole prophylaxis still demonstrates a
substantial abscess prevention by this purely
anti-anaerobic regimen [5]. Nevertheless,
prophylaxis with metronidazole resulted in the
occurrence of febrile morbidity and significant
bacteriuria, with or without urinary tract infection. Post-operative prescription of trimethoprim
and cephalosporins was required in 9 patients in
this group, while no antibiotic therapy was required in the two other groups. It is possible that
the post-operative use of antibiotics prevented
additional cases of febrile morbidity and urinary
tract infection in the metronidazole group.
In 8 of the 11 patients with febrile morbidity no
direct explanation for the temperature rise was
found in the patient records. From these
8 patients 5 showed post-operative asymptomatic
bacteriuria. Fever cannot be explained as a result of bacteriuria when clinical symptoms of infection and pyuria are absent. We assume that
all the 8 cases of unexplained febrile morbidity
were caused by vaginal cuff infections without
abscess formation. This so-called vaginal cuff cellulitis [10] was not scored in the evaluation.
Post-operative bacteriuria in these patients
may reflect the colonization of the urinary tract
with micro-organisms from the vagina: 21 out of
23 micro-organisms causing significant bacteriuria in our study were cultured from the vagina
at the same time (Table 4). Febrile morbidity and
bacteriuria correlated positively with E. coli and
Proteus spp., these organisms being cultured
post-operatively significantly more often in the
vagina of patients in the metronidazole group.
So, presumably metronidazole prevented abscess
formation but this purely anti-anaerobic prophylaxis clearly failed in the prevention of minor
morbidity - fever, cystitis, bacteriuria and possibly cellulitis of the vaginal cuff - caused by the
remaining Gram-negative aerobic flora.
Cefuroxime was very successful in the prevention of post-operative colonization with morbidity related E. coli and Proteus spp. In this
Table 4
Microbiology of the urine postoperatively in the antibiotic groups (number of patients with urine
culture of >1 105 organisms/ml)
Micro-organism recovered Cefuroxime Metronidazole Cefuroxime plus
(n = 23) (n = 22) metronidazole
(n = 23)
Escherichia coli
Proteus mirabilis
Coagulase-negative staphylococcus
Haemolytic streptococcus
Enterococcus
1 4t 2w
0* 7~ 0*
1 3w 0
1 1 1
1 1 0
*Significantly different to the metronidazole group.
tIncluding 2 urinary tract infections.
~Including 3 urinary tract infections.
w not recovered from the vagina at the same time (see text).
12(6A) 1990 Pharmaceutisch Weekblad Scientific edition 287 
group only i patient had evidence of infection in
view of febrile morbidity and 4 had bacteriuria
without infection. We did not observe any difference in post-operative morbidity or bacteriology
in cefuroxime prophylaxis between the combination with metronidazole or not (groups C versus CM). This observation throws doubt on the
general opinion that an anti-anaerobic agent
should be added to cefuroxime as prophylaxis in
vaginal hysterectomy.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the helpful assistance of the staff of the gynaecological department, the department of anaesthesia and the
pharmacy. Mr. A. Talens is mentioned for his
work on the bacteriological analysis. We especially thank Mrs. K. Eling for her role in administrative matters.
References
1 Brouwer WK, Kuiper KM, Langbroek W. The efficacy
of prophylaxis with cefuroxime and metronidazole in
gynaecological surgery. Res Clin Forums 1984;6:25-33.
2 Leabeater B, Kingston J. Cefuroxime and metronidazole in gynaecological surgery. Br J Ohstet Gynaecol
1981;88:543-7.
3 Wijma J, Kauer FM, Van Saene HKF, Van de Wiel
HBM, Janssens J. Antibiotics and suction drainage as
prophylaxis in vaginal and abdominal hysterectomy.
Obstet Gynecol 1987;70:384-8.
4 Ledger W J, Sweet RL, Headington JT. Prophylactic
cephaloridine in the prevention of post-operative pelvic
infections in premenopausal women undergoing vaginal hysterectomy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1973;115:766-
74.
5 Hamod KA, Spence MR, Rosenshein NB, Dillon MB.
Single-dose and multidose prophylaxis in vaginal
hysterectomy: a comparison of sodium cephalothin and
metronidazole. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1980;136:976-9.
6 Heginbotham D, Rutherford AM. Metronidazole in the
prophylaxis of anaerobic infections in gynaecological
surgery. NZ Med J 1979;89:246-8.
7 Onderdonk AB, Bartlett JG, Louie T, Sullivan-Seigler
N, Gorbach SL. Microbial synergy in experimental
intra-abdominal abscess. Infect Immun 1976;13:22-6.
8 Van Saene HKF, Stoutenbeek CP, Miranda DR,
Zandstra DF. A novel approach to infection control in
the intensive care unit. Acta Anaesthesiol Belg
1983;34:193-208.
9 Nissen D, Goldstein AI. A prospective investigation of
the etiology of febrile morbidity following abdominal
hysterectomy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1972;113:111-4.
10 Shapiro M, Munoz A, Tager IB, Schoenbaum SC, Polk
BF. Risk factors for infection at the operative site after
abdominal or vaginal hysterectomy. N Engl J Med
1982;307:1661-6.
11 Kass EH. Chemotherapeutic and antibiotic drugs in
the management of infections of the urinary tract. Am
J Med 1955;18:764-81.
12 Hamod KA, Spence MR, King TM. Prophylactic antibiotics in vaginal hysterectomy: a review. Obstet
Gynaecol Surv 1982;37:207-16.
288 Pharmaceutisch Weekblad Scientific edition 12(6A) 1990 