British Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
September 1979. Vol. 86. pp 737-740
A DOUBLE-BLIND TRIAL OF SINGLE-DOSE
CHEMOPROPHYLAXIS WITH CO-TRIMOXAZOLE DURING
VAGINAL HYSTERECTOMY AND REPAIR
BY
D. D. MATHEWS, Consultant Obstetrician and Gynaecologist
Sheppey General Hospital, Minster-on-Sea, Sheerness
and All Saints’ Hospital, Chatham, Kent
VISANTIKA AGARWAL, Clinical Assistant in Obstetrics and Gynaecology
A. M. GORDON, Consultant Microbiologist
Medway Health District, AN Saints’ Hospital, Chatham
AND
J, COOPER, Medical Adviser
Wellcome Foundation Ltd, United Kingdom and Ireland Zone
Crewe Hall, Crewe, Cheshire
Summary
Twenty-five patients received 10 ml co-trimoxazole (800 mg sulphamethoxazole
and 160 mg trimethoprim) and 25 a placebo by intravenous infusion during one
hour from the commencement of surgery for vaginal hysterectomy with anterior
colporrhaphy and posterior colpo-perineorrhaphy. Single-dose chemoprophylaxis
with co-trimoxazole was shown to be effective in reducing the incidence of postoperative febrile morbidity and urinary tract infection, especially that caused by
Proteus species.
THE desirability of using short instead of
prolonged courses of antimicrobial drugs for the
prevention of postoperative infection has been
emphasized by Garrod (1975); and just three
injections of cephaloridine have proved a very
effective method of chemoprophylaxis in both
abdominal (Mathews et al, 1978) and vaginal
(Ledger et al, 1973) hysterectomy. In a companion study to the present work, Mathews et a1
(1977) showed that even a single infusion of
co-trimoxazole was remarkably effective in
reducing the incidence of urinary tract infection
and colonization of the vagina with Escherichia
coli after abdominal hysterectomy. The present
report describes the effect of a single prophylactic
dose of co-trimoxazole in vaginal hysterectomy
and repair.
PATIENTS AND METHODS
The selection of patients for the trial and the
bacteriological examination of the specimens
were as described in the companion study
(Mathews et al, 1977). The general conduct of the
trial differed only in a few particulars: patients
being treated at All Saints’ Hospital were
included ; preoperative vaginal cleansing was
with a mixture of 0.5 per cent cetriniide and
0.05 per cent chlorhexidine; as the operations
were performed under epidural anaesthesia, the
infusion of co-trimoxazole (800 mg sulpha737 
738 MATHEWS, AGARWAL, GORDON AND COOPER
methoxazole and 160 mg trimethoprim) or
placebo was commenced at the beginning of
operation instead of at the induction of anaesthesia; the position of the weekend in relation
to the operation days made it more convenient
to collect the routine postoperative bacteriological specimens at All Saints' Hospital on the
third and seventh days instead of on the second
and sixth days as at Sheppey General Hospital.
In every patient the operation performed was
vaginal hysterectomy with anterior colporrhaphy
and posterior colpo-perineorrhaphy.
The trial was continued for almost four years
during 1975 to 1978 until 50 patients had been
included.
RESULTS
Twenty-five patients received co-trimoxazole
and 25 the placebo. All were alive and well six
weeks after operation. There were no hypersensitivity reactions to either preparation but one
patient in the placebo group developed a rash
after being given oral co-trimoxazole because of
a urinary tract infection.
Table I shows how the groups compared with
regard to age, weight of patients and duration of
surgery. Table I1 shows that preoperatively the
co-trimoxazole group of patients had a higher
nasal carriage rate of Staphyloccus aureus, and a
higher incidence of colonization of the vagina
with various potential pathogens and infection
of the urinary tract with E. coli. As in the
companion study, urinary tract infection was
diagnosed when a catheter or mid-stream
TABLE I
Age and weight of patients
CO-trimoxazole Placebo
group &TOUP
Age bears)
Mean k SD
Range
Weight (kg)
Mean k SD
Range
61*4+ 11.8 55.8 k 11.0
40-82 38-78
60-7k11.6 65.8k10.5
32.2-96'2 47.0-96.0
Duration of surgery
(minutes)
Mean k SD 56*2+19*1 60.7+16.8
Range 30-95 35-95
TABLE I1
Results of bacteriological examination of nasal and high
vaginal swabs and of catheter specimens of urine obtained
prior to operation
cotrimoxazole Placebo
group group
(No.) WO.)
Staphyloceus aureus isolated from
anterior nares 10 4
Potential pathogens isolated from
upper vagina:
Escherichia coli 4 2
Proteus species 1 1
Haemolytic streptococci other
than Streptococcus pyogenes 2
Streptococcus faecalis 1
Candida albicans 2
-
-
-
Pathogens isolated from infected
urine*
Eseherichia coli 3
Streptococcus faecalis - 1
-
* See text for definition.
specimen of urine showed 50 or more leucocytes
and a pure growth of at least 104 bacteria/mmg.
Table I11 shows that following operation there
was a significantly higher incidence of febrile
morbidity in the group of patients who had
TABLE I11
Incidence of febrile morbidity, tachycardia and administration of antimicrobial agents duringfirst ten postoperative
days
cotrimoxazole Placebo
group group
(No.) (No.)
Temperature 38.0"C or more on any two days 8* 16*
Pulse rate 1 lO/minute or more on any two days 3 6
Temperature 38 .O"C or more and
pulse rate 1 lO/minute or more
on any two days 2 4
agents 3 9
Administration of antimicrobial
* Difference is statistically significant (x* = 3-93;
P 10.05). 
COTRIMOXAZOLE IN VAGINAL HYSTERECTOMY 739
TABLE IV
Incidence of pelvic wound and postoperative urinary traci
infection ~ ~~ ~~ - co- trimoxazole Placebo
group group
(No.) (No.)
Sudden discharge of pus Hospital - 3
Home 2 1
Urinary tract infection*
(mid-stream specimen)
Hospital? 5** 14**
Home: 2 2
2 to 3 and/or 6 to 7 days after operation.
6 weeks after operation.
P < 0.025).
* See text for definition.
** Difference is statistically significant (xa = 5.43;
received the placebo. These patients also
suffered more frequently from severe tachycardia and were more often treated with antimicrobial drugs.
The main difference between the groups
shown in Table IV is the significantly higher
incidence of urinary tract infections in the
placebo group. Three patients in the cotrimoxazole group and four in the placebo
TABLE V
Bacteria isolated from infected urine after operation
cotrimoxazole Placebo
group group
(No.) (No.)
First postoperative week
Escherichia coli 2 4
Proteus species -* I*
Staphylococcus aureus - 2
Streptococcus faecalis 2
Coagulase negative
-
staphylococci 1 1
Sixth postoperative week
Escherichia coli 2
Coagulase negative staphylococci -
Klebsiella species -
-
1
1
* Difference is statistically significant (xa = 5.98;
P <0*025).
group had required catheterization and continuous closed bladder drainage at some time
during the first postoperative week. Table V
shows the bacteria isolated from the urine in
infected cases. The most frequently isolated
pathogens in the placebo group were species of
Proteus. These were not isolated at all from the
urine of patients who had received co-trimoxazole.
Table VI shows that there was little evidence
of postoperative colonization of the vagina by
pathogenic bacteria in either group.
DISCUSSION
The main similarity between the results
obtained here and those reported in the companion study on abdominal hysterectomy
(Mathews et ul, 1977) is the striking protection
of the urinary tract against infection afforded by
single-dose chemoprophylaxis with co-trimoxazole. Whereas, however, in the companion study
the protection was primarily against infection
with E. coli, in this study it was primarily
against infection with Proteus species. The
predominance of Proteus species in the present
TABLE VI
Bacteria isolated from the upper vagina during the first
postoperative week
cotrimoxazole Placebo
group group
(No.) (No.)
Second or third postoperative day
Escherichia coli 4 1
Proteus species - 2
Staphylococcus aureus 2 1
Streptococcus pyogenes - 1
Other haemolytic streptococci - 1
Clostridium species 1
Coagulase negative
staphylococci 1
-
-
Sixth or seventh postoperative day
Escherichia coli
Proteus species
Staphylococcus aureus
Coagulase negative
staphylococci
Streptococcus pyogenes
Other haemolytic streptococci
Atypical coliform
Bacteroides fragils
4
1
1
1
-
-
-
1
3
1
I
-
-
1
1
- 
740 MATHEWS, AGARWAL, GORDON AND COOPER
trial is probably related to the higher mean age
of the patients, the majority of whom were
postmenopausal. The more acid vaginal secretions of the predominantly premenopausal
women undergoing abdominal hysterectomy in
the previous reported study will have tended to
selectively inhibit the proliferation of Proteus
species in the peri-urethral area of these patients.
Comparison of Tables I1 and VI shows that
colonization of the vagina with E. coli was no
more frequent after operation than before.
Furthermore, it was clearly not prevented from
occurring by the administration of a single dose
of co-trimoxazole. Both these facts are in
contrast to the findings reported after abdominal
hysterectomy in the companion study and may
be the result of the more stringent cleansing of
the vagina before operation.
Also in contrast with the previously reported
study is the profound effect which single-dose
chemoprophylaxis with co-trimoxazole appears
to have exerted upon the general condition-as
judged by incidence of febrile morbidity,
tachycardia, and need for antimicrobial chemotherapy-of many of the patients who underwent vaginal hysterectomy and repair.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Our thanks are due to the Wellcome Foundation Ltd who supplied the co-trimoxazole and
placebo and to all the hospital staff who helped
with the trial.
REFERENCES
Garrod, L. P. (1975): British MedicalJournal, 4,561.
Ledger, W. J., Sweet, R. L., and Headington, J. T. (1973):
American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 115,
766.
Mathews, D. D., Ross, H., and Cooper, J. (1977):
British Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 84,
894.
Mathews, D. D., Agarwal, V., and Ross, H. (1978):
British Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 85,
381. 