Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ijog20
Download by: [ECU Libraries] Date: 22 March 2016, At: 16:02
Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
ISSN: 0144-3615 (Print) 1364-6893 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ijog20
Double blind trial with a single intramuscular
dose of co-trimsxazole before total abdominal
hysterectomy
A. R. B. Smith, T. N. Stanbridge, G. A. Morewood & J. Cooper
To cite this article: A. R. B. Smith, T. N. Stanbridge, G. A. Morewood & J. Cooper (1984)
Double blind trial with a single intramuscular dose of co-trimsxazole before total
abdominal hysterectomy, Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 5:1, 49-52, DOI:
10.3109/01443618409075746
To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/01443618409075746
Published online: 02 Jul 2009.
Submit your article to this journal
View related articles 
Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology (1 984) 5, 49-52 Printed in Great Britain 49
Double blind trial with a single
intramuscular dose of co-trimsxazole
before total abdominal hysterectomy
A. R. B. Smith, T. N. Stanbridge, G. A. Morewood and J. Cooper
Wythensha we Maternity Hospital, Manchester, and Wellcorne Foundation, Crewe,
Cheshire
Summary
Chemoprophylaxis with intravenous co-trimoxazole
protects the urinary tract from pathogenic bacteria in
women undergoing pelvic surgery. This study involved a
double blind trial with intramuscular co-trimoxazole
given 1 hour before surgery. A marked reduction in
postoperative urinary tract infection was demonstrated
with some reduction in vaginal vault infection.
TEE morbidity following major gynaecological
surgery is quoted to be as high as 40 per cent for
total abdominal hysterectomy by Allen et al.
(1972). This morbidity is primarily infective and
affects mainly the abdominal and vaginal vault
wounds and the urinary tract. Postoperative morbidity commonly leads to prolonged postoperative
hospitalisation and it is mainly in the United
States of America, where financial implications of
hospitalisation are more immediately realised, that
clinical trials using antibiotic prophylaxis have
been performed with the aim of reducing rates of
postoperative infection. A comprehensive review
of these trials was presented by Duff and Park
(1980).
According to Burke (1963, 1973) postoperative
infection is primarily a result of impaired tissue
resistance caused by tissue trauma during surgery.
In general, this impaired host resistance lasts only
a few hours and if chemoprophylaxis is to be
employed it will be most effective at' the time of
and for a few hours after surgery. The efficacy of
short term chemoprophylaxis has been demonstrated in numerous clinical trials outlined by Duff
and Park (1980). Short term chemoprophylaxis
also has the advantage that antibiotic resistance is
less likely to develop.
While most American work has been directed
towards prevention of abdominal and vaginal
vault wound infection, undoubtedly urinary tract
infection also accounts for considerable morbidity. The ideal antibiotic for use in prophylaxis
for gynaecological surgery will eliminate bacteria
commonly isolated from all three sites of infection.
Co-trimoxazole is a broad spectrum antibacterial
agent which is active against common skin and
urinary tract pathogens (Escherichia coli, Proteus
mirabilis, Streptococcus faecalis) and has also been
shown to be active against Bacteroides species
(Philips and Warren, 1974) which are thought to
be important in vaginal vault infections.
Matthews et al. (1977) have shown that short
term intravenous co-trimoxazole prophylaxis in
abdominal hysterectomy was particularly effective
in preventing urinary tract infection but colonisation of the vagina and febrile morbidity were not
consistently reduced.
This paper reports on a double blind trial
using a single intramuscular dose of cotrimoxazole (trimethoprim 160 mg, sulphamethoxazole 800 mg) before surgery.
PATIENTS AND METHODS
Sixty patients who were being admitted for total
abdominal hysterectomy were included in the trial
on a voluntary basis. They were interviewed in the
preoperation clinic and details of the trial were
explained. A mid-stream specimen of urine was
taken for microscopy and culture and patients
were excluded if the urine culture was positive.
Patients were also excluded if they gave a
history of renal disease, or hypersensitivity to
sulphonamide or co-trimoxazole, or if malignant
pathology was suspected. Patients who weighed
over 90 kg were excluded. The co-trimoxazole and
placebo were supplied in ampoules containing 3 ml
fluid, and randomised in consecutively numbered
envelopes. The placebo ampoule contained saline
Downloaded by [ECU Libraries] at 16:02 22 March 2016 
50
Co-trimoxazole group
Case no.
9 Staph. albus
(coagulase negative)
(wound haematoma
evacuated under
general anaesthetic)
10 Bacteroides sp.
Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology (1 984) Vol. 5/No. 1
Control group
Case no.
28 Culture sterile
41 Staph. aureus
solution. Each ampoule of co-trimoxazole contained trimethoprim 160 mg and sulphamethoxazole 800mg. One hour before the operation,
when the pre-medication was administered into
the right buttock, each patient in the trial received
the contents of an ampoule injected intramuscularly into the left buttock. Immediately before
abdominal preparation for surgery a catheter specimen of urine and a swab from the posterior
vaginal fornix was obtained using a Cusco speculum. The swab was placed in Stuart’s transport
medium and both specimens were immediately
transferred to the laboratory. Preoperative vulva1
and vaginal preparation was with 0.05 per cent wjv
chlorhexidine gluconate and the abdominal skin
was prepared with 0.5 per cent chlorhexidine in 70
per cent ethyl alcohol with 0.1 per cent acriflavine.
The operations were all performed by a consultant
or with a consultant in attendance. Chromic
catgut was used for internal ligatures and peritoneum. Dexon was used for the rectus sheath and
skin (interrupted mattress sutures). A dry dressing
was applied to the wound for 24 hours postoperatively. No postoperative swabbing or catheterisation was performed routinely.
Significant postoperative pyrexia (greater than
38°C beyond 24 hours after surgery) was noted
and the source of infection sought. Routinely, all
patients had high vaginal swabs and mid-stream
urine specimens taken on the third. and sixth
postoperative days. The high vaginal swabs were
transported promptly to the laboratory in Stuart’s
medium and urine specimens were examined
within 2 hours of collection. Skin sutures were
removed on the sixth postoperative day and the
patient was discharged on the seventh postoperative day unless otherwise indicated.
Bacteriological methods
Urine specimens were cultured on MacConkey’s
agar; viable bacterial counts being performed by a
‘blotting paper’ technique. Pus cells were estimated in specimens centrifuged at 3000 r.p.m. for
15 minutes. Vaginal swabs were cultured on blood
agar and chocolate agar aerobically and anaerobically and MacConkey’s agar aerobically. Isolates
were identified and sensitivity tests carried out on
Oxoid ‘Iso-Sensitest Agar’. The trial was approved
by the hospital ethical committee.
RESULTS
Each group initially included 30 patients. One
patient was withdrawn from the trial because
additional antibiotic prophylaxis was prescribed
after the abdominal wound had been reopened 6
hours postoperatively for religature of a uterine
artery. All the patients were well at 6 weeks
postoperative follow-up.
No difference between the two groups with
respect to age (mean 41, range 26-58 years), social
class (33 per cent classes 1 and 2, 67 per cent
classes 3, 4 and 5), height (mean 1.62, range
1.50-1.75 m), weight (mean 62.4, range 44.5-
85.7 kg), or incidence of previous abdominal surgery (37 per cent) was demonstrated. The incidence of uterine pathology, which was benign in
each case, was similar in the two groups and in
each group predominantly consisted of leiomyomata and adenomyosis.
Wound infection
Wound infection was diagnosed by the drainage of
pus from the wound in the presence of a significant
pyrexia (> 38 “C). Two wound infections were
diagnosed in the co-trimoxazole group. One of
these was associated with a large wound haematoma which required evacuation under general
anaesthesia. The other had no obvious cause. Two
wound infections were diagnosed in the control
group but no complicating factors occurred in
either case and both resolved spontaneously.
There was no difference in the wound infection
rate between the two groups. The cases of wound
infection are shown in Table I.
Vaginal vault infection
Symptomatic vaginal vault infection was diagnosed by detection of a vault collection with
Downloaded by [ECU Libraries] at 16:02 22 March 2016 
Smith et al.: Co-trimoxazole before hysterectomy 51
Table II. Organisms isolated from vaginal vault infection-symptomatic (T>38'C) and asymptomatic patients
Co-trimoxazole group
Case no.
~~ ~
Control group
Case no.
Symptomatic nil'
Asymptomatic 6 Staph. aureus
13 Gp. B haem. streptococcus
44 Gp. B haem. streptococcus
59 Gp. B haem. streptococcus
60 Bacteroides corrodens
..2 (1) = 2.41; P= 0.12.
8
12
46
57
5
27
31
34
Sterile
G6 8 haern. streptococcus
Bacteroides melaninogenicus
Sterile
Gp.B haem. streptococcus
Gp.C haem. streptococcus
Staph. aureus
Candida albicans
drainage of pus in the presence of a significant
pyrexia (>38 "C). No symptomatic vault infections were diagnosed in the co-trimoxazole group
while four such infections were diagnosed in
the control group, an insignificant difference.
Potential pathogens were isolated from high
vaginal vault swabs from nine patients, five from
the co-trimoxazole group and four from the control group, but all were asymptomatic. None of
these cases had positive cultures preoperatively.
The organisms isolated are detailed in Table 11.
Urinary tract infection
Urinary tract infection was diagnosed when a midstream specimen of urine contained 10-20 or more
leucocytes per high power field in the presence of a
pure growth of over 100000 organisms/ml. No
patients consulted their general practitioners in the
6 week period after discharge from hospital with
symptoms or signs of urinary tract infection. In
the co-trimoxazole group urinary tract infection
was diagnosed on two occasions. One of the
Table 111. Organisms isolated from urinary tract infections-symptomatic' and
asymptomatic patients
Case no.
Trimetho prim
sulphamethoxazole
sensitive Symptomatic'
Co-trimoxazole group
30 Staph. albus coag. neg No No
40 E. coli No No
Total 2t
Control group
1
5
12
16
12
23
27
29
35
39
54
E. coli
Strep. faecalis
E. coli
Proteus mirabilis
E. coli
E. coli
Strep. faecalis
Staph. albus coag. neg.
Proteus mirabilis
Staph. albus coag. neg
E. coli
Staph. albus coag. neg.
Strep faecalis
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Total Ilt 10 5
* Symptomatic=temperature >38'C with frequency and dysuria.
t 1' = 5.1 0, P = 0.02.
Downloaded by [ECU Libraries] at 16:02 22 March 2016 
52 Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology (1984) Vol. 5/No. 1
patients had multiple sclerosis with bladder problems and a-long history of recurrent urinary tract
infection (though the urine was sterile before the
operation). The other patient was catheterised on
the second day because of urinary retention, possibly secondary to urinary tract infection. In both
cases the organisms isolated were resistant to cotrimoxazole. Ten urinary tract infections were
diagnosed in the control group of which five were
accompanied by symptoms including frequency
and dysuria ('symptomatic' in Table 11) and a
significant pyrexia (> 38 "C). Two additional infections were diagnosed in the day 3 urine which
were followed by sterile urine on day 6. The cause
of this transient infection is unknown and both
cases were excluded from the analysis.
A lower incidence of urinary tract infection was
demonstrated in the co-trimoxazole group. Only
one of the ten infections in the control group was
caused by a co-trimoxazole resistant organism.
The organisms involved in the urinary tract infections me shown in Table 111.
No patients suffered hypersensitivity reactions,
either locally or systemically. Twenty per cent of
patients felt that the injection of co-trimoxazole
caused more discomfort than the intramuscular
pre-medication (papaveretum 15 mg) but the discomfort was not severe and was always transient.
DISCUSSION
In accordance with the findings of other groups
the major benefit of single dose chemoprophylaxis
with co-trimoxazole is the significant reduction in
incidence of postoperative urinary tract infection.
In the control group the incidence of postoperative
urinary tract infection was similar to that found in
the other units in the region (D. M. Jones, personal communication) and represents a distinct
proportion of postoperative morbidity. The incidence of vaginal vault infection in the cotrimoxazole group was rather lower than that in
the control group. The protective value of short
term chemoprophylaxis with co-trimoxazole is
primarily to the urinary tract, the drug being
excreted in the urine during and for some time
after surgery. Organisms introduced at the time of
operative catheterisation may be able to establish
infection because of a combination of impaired
tissue resistance (Burke, 1963, 1973) and changes
in bladder function, including a raised postoperative residual urine (Wake, 1980).
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Mr R. H. Martin and to Sisters
Jackson and Da Costa for their help with the trial. We
are also indebted to Mr Brian Faragher for help with
the statistics and Mrs E. 0. Stewart who typed the
manuscript.
REFERENCES
Allen J. L., Rampone J. F. and Wheeless C. R. (1972)
Use of a prophylactic antibiotic in elective major
gynecologic operations. Obstetrics and Gynecology 39,
2 16-224.
Burke J. F. (1963) Preoperative antibiotics. Surgical
Clinics of North America 43, 665-676.
Burke J. F. (1973) Preventive antibiotic management in
surgery (1973). Annual Review of Medicine 24,
Duff P. and Park R. C. (1980) Antibiotic prophylaxis in
vaginal hysterectomy: a review. Obstetrics and Gynecology 55, Supplement, 193s-202s.
Mathews D. D., Ross H. and Cooper J. (1977) A double
blind trial of single dose chemoprophylaxis with cotrimoxazole during total abdominal hysterectomy.
British Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology 84,
894-897.
Philips I. and Warren C. (1974) Susceptibility of
Bacteroides fragilis to trimethoprim and sulphamethoxazole. Lancet i, 827-828.
Wake C. R. (1980) The immediate effect of abdominal
hysterectomy on intravesical pressure and detrusor
activity. British Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
289-294.
87, 901-902.
Correspondence should be addressed to: Dr A. R. B. Smith, Saint Mary's Hospital, Hathersage Road. Manchester M13OJH
Downloaded by [ECU Libraries] at 16:02 22 March 2016 