Single-dose cephalosporin for prevention of major pelvic
infection after vaginal hysterectomy: Cefazolin versus cefoxitin
versus cefotaxime
David L. Hemsell, M.D., Roger E. Bawdon, Ph.D., Patricia G. Hemsell, R.A.,
Brenda J. Nobles, Edward R. Johnson, M.D., and Molly C. Heard, R.A.
Dallas, Texas
Antimicrobial overutilization accelerates the development of bacterial resistance. A prospective,
randomized, blinded clinical trial of vaginal hysterectomy prophylaxis was designed to compare the
efficacy, safety, and costs of cefazolin with those of cefoxitin and cefotaxime. Sixteen women (7.5%)
developed febrile morbidity only, 10 (4.7%) developed major pelvic infection requiring parenteral
antimicrobial therapy, and neither clinical nor laboratory adverse reactions of significance were observed.
Anemia, diabetes, and additional surgical procedures were associated with a significantly increased
incidence of postoperative infection; no regimen was mora protective for women with or without these risk
factors. Infections almost doubled hospital stay and the charges for health care. Diagnosis-related group
reimbursement would have been more than $1,300 less than the mean hospital charge for women who
developed infection. Utilizing cefazolin for prophylaxis and reserving cefoxitin and cefotaxime for therapy is
cost and antimicrobial efficient. (AM J OBSTET GVNECOL 1987;156:1201-5.)
Key words: Prophylaxis, vaginal hysterectomy, single dose
A prospective, randomized, blinded clinical trial was
designed to compare safety, tolerance, and the ability
of single-dose cefazolin, cefoxitin, and cefotaxime to
prevent major pelvic infection after vaginal hysterectomy. Establishment of comparative efficacy of older
and newer cephalosporins was undertaken because of
concern for the potential development of bacterial resistance to effective therapeutic agents as a result of
increased exposure by their administration for prophylaxis. A placebo arm was not included because previous studies in our hospital established infection rates
of 51 % without antibiotic and 57% with placebo.' Risk
factors for infection and adequacy of diagnosis-related
group (DRG) reimbursement were further concerns.
Material and methods
Women were sequentially entered into this study that
was approved by the Institutional Review Board if they
gave informed written consent, had not received an
antimicrobial within the preceding 3 days, and were
From the Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Anesthesiology, University of Texas Health Science Center, Southwestern
Medical School, Parkland Memorial Hospital.
Supported by a Grant-in-Aid from Eli Lilly & Company, Indianapolis, Indiana.
Received for publication September 8, 1986; revised January 8,
1987; accepted January 22,1987.
Reprint requests: David L. Hemsell, M.D., Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, University of Texas Health Science Center at
Dallas, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX 75235.
not allergic to cephalosporins and did not have a history
of immediate hypersensitivity reaction to penicillins.
Routine hematologic, renal, and hepatic function tests
were performed prior to stuc;ly entry and on the third
postoperative day. Regimens to which women were randomly assigned by a computer-generated random list
were 1 or 2 gm. of cefazolin; 2 gm of tefoxitin, and
1 gm of cefotaxime. Patients were not stratified by the
condition requiring surgical therapy, additional diagnoses, Or planned procedure. Two vials, each containing one half of a total dose, were completely wrapped
with paper to obscure identification and were placed
in a box, on which appeared the patient's enrollment
study number. The contents of each vial were diluted
and injected into the hip muscle of each study subject
by the ward nursing staff immediately prior to departure for the operating room. At removal of the uterus,
a blood sample was taken,. the time noted, and serum
separated. Serum and samples of at least 5 gm of myometrium were immediately frozen and kept at -200 C,
until antimicrobial concentrations were assayed by
high-pressure liquid chromatography. Women were observed daily for adverse reactions and infection while
hospitalized and were followed up for 3 to 6 weeks after
operation to detect late occurrences.
Definitions of febrile morbidity, urinary tract infection, and pelvic infection requiring parenteral antirriicrobial therapy were those previously used.' At the diagnosis of infection and prior to therapy, culture rriaterial was obtained with a sterile swab cephalad to the
1201 
1202 Hemseli et al. May 1987
Am J Obstet Gynecol
Table I. Clinical and surgical characteristics (mean ± SD) of women given single-dose cephalosporin
before vaginal hysterectomy
Variable
Age (yr)
Weight (pounds)
Length of operation (min)
Uterine weight (gm)
Additional procedures
Colporrhaphy
Adnexectomy
Laparotomy
*p <0.001.
19m
cefazolin
(N = 53)
32.4 ± 7.8
153 ± 35
93.2 ± 42.4
129.1 ± 74.4*
9
12
3
vaginal cuff. A speculum was used and care was taken
to avoid contamination by contact with the vagina. Apposed vaginal margins were opened with a sterile dressing forceps. Swabs were placed into pre reduced screw
cap tubes containing chopped meat-glucose (Difco, Detroit, Michigan) for transport to the research microbiology laboratory. Identification of isolates was made
with the use of API systems (Analytab Products, Inc.,
Plainview, New York) with gas liquid chromatographic
confirmation of anaerobic bacteria. Hospital stay calculations began with the day of operation. Copies of
hospital bills and DRG reimbursement categories and
rates were obtained. The bills included all charges but
those for the study drug. Data were analyzed by X2,
Student t, paired Student t, Mann-Whitney, Fisher's
exact, Newman-Keuls multiple comparisons, KruskalWallis, and/or Welch's approximation tests.
Results
Between December 1983 and February 1985, 237
women were entered into this study. Excluded from
final comparisons were eight women who did not have
the scheduled operation after the preoperative antimicrobial dose was given, 10 who underwent abdominal
hysterectomy after examination while they were under
anesthesia, six who were given antibiotics because of
intraoperative findings, and one who developed pneumonia after operation. These 25 women and the remaining 212 women were similarly distributed among
the four prophylactic regimens.
Indications for operation were cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia, abnormal uterine bleeding, stress urinary incontinence, pelvic relaxation, and chronic pelvic pain,
without significant interregimen difference. Racial distribution and contraceptive practices were similar; in
97 women (46%) operation had been performed for
tubal sterilization. Twelve diabetic women (5.7%) were
equally distributed among the four regimens. Several
other clinical and surgical variables are presented in
Table I. Laparotomy was performed in five patients to
control bleeding.
2gm
cefazolin
(N = 53)
33.7 ± 9.5
152 ± 46
90.9 ± 43.0
1I0.2 ± 53.4
12
II
2
2gm
cefoxitin
(N = 51)
32.2 ± 9.1
148 ± 43*
80.5 ± 83.4
109.1 ± 36.1
10
9
o
19tn
cefotaxime
(N = 55)
32.8 ± 10.3
151 ± 47
87.2 ± 42.0
97.5 ± 36.6*
12
13
o
Sixteen women (7.5%) developed febrile morbidity a
mean of 62 hours after operation without significant
interregimen differences (Table II); it was associated
with a mean prolongation in hospital stay of 1.4 days
(p < 0.001). Extra procedures were more frequently
associated with febrile morbidity (p = 0.004), and
women undergoing extra procedures had a 1.4-day
mean longer hospital stay with or without asymptomatic
temperature elevation. One of five women who underwent laparotomy deveioped febrile morbidity. For
unexplained reasons, charges for care of women with
febrile morbidity were significantly increased only for
women given 2 gm of cefazolin. Interregimen mean
hospital bill totals were within $83.71 of each other,
and the mean for all 212 women was $2465.61.
Nine of 10 women (4.7%) requiring parenteral antimicrobial treatment developed pelvic infection a mean
of 78 hours after the incision, and one women given
cefotaxime was readmitted for therapy 19 days after
operation. Two women did not have pretreatment cultures cephalad to the vaginal cuff, and from two only
Streptococcus faecalis (enterococci) was recovered. From
the remainder were recovered 17 aerobes and 14 anaerobes. S. faecalis was recovered from seven women
(87.5%), Escherichi coli from four, and Bacteroides bivius
and Bacteroides fragilis group species were recovered
from three women. Six aerobic and six anaerobic streptococci were also recovered as were two Clostridium species. The mean temperature at treatment for these 10
women was 38.90 C (102 0 F), and the mean duration
of therapy, which was similar in all regimens, was 4.4
days. Six women were given combination antimicrobial
therapy, and four received expanded spectrum singleagent cephalosporin therapy without significant interregimen difference. Enterococci specific therapy was
included in two combination regimens, and addition of
such was required for clinical cure in one of the remaining eight women. Mean hospital stay for these
women was 7.3 days, sigQificantly longer than if infection did not develop (p = 0.026 to 0.018) (Table II),
and the mean hospital charge of $4303.20 was signif-
Volume 156
Number 5
Single-dose cephalosporin at vaginal hysterectomy 1203
Table II. Clinical outcome for women given single-dose cephalosporin before vaginal hysterectomy
19m
cefazolin
Variable (N = 53)
No morbidity 44
Febrile morbidity 6
Major infection 3
Hospital stay (days)*
All patients 3.9 ± 1.2
No morbidity 3.6 ± 0.9
Febrile morbidity 5.4 ± 1.7
Pelvic infection 5.7 ± 1.9
*Mean ± SD.
icantly increased (p = 0.032 to 0.018). Infections were
not clinically more severe in any regimen(s).
Risk factors for infection were sought among many
clinical and surgical variables; three were identified.
Depressed hemoglobin concentration (l0.1 ± 1.5
gm/dl) on the third postoperative day was directly related to the development of infection, but estimated
blood loss was not; for those who remained uninfected
it was 11.2 ± 1.5 gm/dl (p = 0.029). Three of 12
women with diabetes developed infection (p = 0.022).
Vaginal repair or adnexectomy increased the risk of
postoperative infection (p = 0.007), but the combination of both procedures did not have additive impact.
Significantly more women given cefazolin underwent
additional procedures (p = 0.035); none of the women
who underwent laparotomy developed infection. Neither length of surgical procedure nor length of training
of the operating surgeons (third-year house officers)
was a risk factor. None of the regimens was statistically
superior in ability to prevent infection in these women
at higher risk.
Cefazolin concentrations in serum at uterine removal
were significantly higher than those of cefoxitin and
cefotaxime up to 395 minutes after incision (p <
0.001). Concentrations of cefazolin in myometrium
were also significantly higher than those of cefoxitin
and cefotaxime (p = 0.03 to < 0.001) and remained
high for a prolonged period of time compared with
those of cefoxitin and cefotaxime. There was no correlation between antimicrobial concentration in serum
and/or myometrium at uterine removal and the subsequent development of infection in any regimen.
One women did not have postoperative follow-up,
two women were not evaluable for late infection because they were given bicillin for treatment of syphilis
after hospital discharge, and three women were treated
for a presumed urinary tract infection although urine
cultures were sterile. One woman was successfully
treated with nitrofurantoin macrocrystals for asymptomatic Escherichia coli bacteriuria as an outpatient.
None of these six women developed pelvic infection,
but one woman given 1 gm of cefazolin and one given
2gm 2 gm 19m
cefazolin cefoxitin cefotaxime
(N = 53) (N = 51) (N = 55)
47 46 49
4 3 3
2 2 3
4.0 ± 2.5 3.9 ± 1.5 4.1 ± 1.3
3.7 ± 1.0 3.6 ± 0.9 3.9 ± 1.0
5.0 ± 1.4 5.0 ± 2.0 5.3 ± 0.6
9.0 ± 1.4 8.5 ± 3.5 6.7 ± 2.9
cefoxitin were given an oral antimicrobial as outpatients
for mild vaginal cuff infection after discharge from the
hospital. Both had undergone vaginal hysterectomy
only.
No adverse clinical effects were observed, and no
adverse effects on renal function or alkaline phosphatase were observed in any regimen. Transient elevations in serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase after
normal preoperative values were observed in four
women given 1 gm of cefazolin and cefotaxime, six
women given 2 gm of cefazolin, and eight women given
cefoxitin.
Under the prospective payment system, hospital
reimbursement for women receiving Medicare or Medicaid who undergo vaginal hysterectomy differs depending on several factors. The DRG reimbursement
is $2739.45 for women without complications and
$2996.25 for women who develop postoperative pelvic
infection.
Comment
Antimicrobial overutilization includes both administration for a prolonged period of time and inappropriate agent selection. Most comparative studies reporting ineffective prophylaxis to reduce pelvic infection after vaginal hysterectomy have been multidose
studies."-6 Many cephalosporins have demonstrated
clinical efficacy with single dosing, which has advantages over multidosing. Repeated and prolonged exposure to an antimicrobial has been shown not only to
increase bacterial resistance patterns but also to alter
the species of bacteria recovered from patients who
develop hospital-acquired infections. Such has been observed after as few as three doses of antimicrobial in
our patients.7
•
8
Identification of risk factors for major postoperative
infection is important so that physicians can modify
care and hopefully reduce increased risk to a level comparable with that observed for the majority of patients.
Repeated attempts to identify risk factors in our patient
population have not resulted in uniform findings, perhaps because of sample size limitation. Total body and 
1204 Hemseli et al.
uterine weight, which differed preoperatively in this
study, have never been risk factors and were not here.
Older age, prolonged surgical length, diabetes, and increased estimated blood loss were risk factors in one
study,9 and additional procedures were a risk factor in
another study.IO In that latter study, febrile morbidity
was not related to additional surgical procedures as it
was in the current study, but vaginal repair without
infection prolonged hospital stay by a mean of 1.2 days,
as was observed here. Extra procedures were not a risk
factor, however, for women who developed pelvic infection after placebo. I
It was predicted that regimen efficacy would be similar for women undergoing vaginal hysterectomy only
but that newer agents with a broader spectrum of bactericidal activity might be superior for women with
identified risk factors. Interregimen efficacy was similar
for these women as well, but small sample size may be
responsible for this unexpected observation. With the
use of two-tailed analysis with 90% confidence limits,
3074 women would be required in each of four arms
to demonstrate statistical significance in infection rates
with this study used as an indicator. It is possible that
more than one dose rather than an expanded spectrum
of any prophylactic antibiotic would provide enhanced
protection for women at increased risk. Investigational
confirmation of the most effective means of protecting
these women must be obtained.
Hospital reimbursement at current DRG rates for
uninfected women in this study would have been within
$362.34 of mean hospital charge. However, reimbursement for women who developed infection would have
been a mean of $1306.95 less than charges incurred,
thus identifying a major problem with current rates of
reimbursement for such women. This problem affects
hospitals providing care for Medicare and Medicaid
patients. It may also affect women who are privately
insured and whose health care reimbursement will undoubtedly follow DRG guidelines.
The importance of preventing these polymicrobial
pelvic infections is obvious. Hospital stay was essentially
doubled and the mean charge for infected women was
$1926.09 higher than that for women who remained
uninfected. Mean hospital stay of 7.3 days for the 10
women who developed infection in this clinical trial was
identical to that observed for women given three doses
of moxalactam or cefazolin,!O indicating that by historical comparison in the same hospital, single dosing was
not followed by infections that were more frequent or
clinically more severe. That has been our observation
in single- versus multiple-dose comparative trials as
well.7
-
9 Late infections do develop, may require rehospitalization, and should be included for accurate efficacy evaluation, but the majority of significant infections occur before discharge from the hospital.
May 1987
Am J Obstet Gynecol
The spectrum of antibacterial activity is an important
consideration when a regimen to treat established infection is selected, but results reported here indicate
that such apparently does not apply to the prophylactic
application of the agents investigated. Cefoxitin and
cefotaxime have established efficacy as single-agent
therapy for women who develop polymicrobial pelvic
infections. II-IS Cefazolin is not usually included as a
therapeutic agent for women who develop acute pelvic
infections,"' 15 and it is not approved by the Food and
Drug Administration for this use. 16 Since cefazolin is as
effective at preventing infection as the other two agents
and is significantly less expensive, its utilization for prophylaxis with cefoxitin and cefotaxime used only for
therapy should result not only in hospital and patient
monetary savings but also in prolonged usefulness of
two efficacious therapeutic agents.
REFERENCES
l. Hemsell DL, Cunningham FG, Kappus S, Nobles B. Cefoxitin for prophylaxis in premenopausal women undergoing vaginal hysterectomy. Obstet Gynecol 1980:56:
629-34.
2. Bivens MD, Neufeld j, McCarty WD. The prophylactic
use of KeRex and KeRin in vaginal hysterectomy. AM j
OBSTET GYNECOL 1975;122:169-75.
3. Roberts jM, Homesley HD. Low-dose carbenicillin prophylaxis for vaginal and abdominal hysterectomy. Obstet
Gynecol 1978;52:83-7.
4. Mathews DD, Agarwal V, Gordon AM, Cooper J. A
double-blind trial of single-dose chemoprophylaxis with
co-trimoxazole during vaginal hysterectomy and repair.
Br j Obstet Gynaecol 1979;86:737-40.
5. Vincelette j, Finkelstein F, Aoki FY, et aL Double-blind
trial of perioperative intravenous metronidazole prophylaxis for abdominal and vaginal hysterectomy. Surgery
1983;93: 185-9.
6. Khan MS, Begg HB, Frampton j, Hughes TB. A comparative study of the prophylactic effect of one dose and
two dose intravenous metronidazole therapy in gynecological surgery. Scand j Infect Dis 1980;26(suppl): 115-7.
7. Hemsell DL, Heard ML, Nobles Bj, Hemsell PG. Singledose cefoxitin prophylaxis for premenopausal women undergoing vaginal hysterectomy. Obstet Gynecol 1984;63:
285-90.
8. Hemsell DL, Hemsell PG, Heard ML, Nobles BJ. Preoperative cefoxitin prophylaxis for elective abdominal hysterectomy. AM j OBSTET GYNECOL 1985; 153:225-6.
9. Hemsell DL, johnson ER, Bawdon RE, Hemsell PG, Nobles Bj, Heard ML. Ceftriaxone and cefazolin prophylaxis for hysterectomy. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1985; 161:
197-203.
10. Hemsell D, Hemsell P, Nobles B, Heard M, Bawdon R.
Moxalactam versus cefazolin prophylaxis for vaginal hysterectomy. AM j OBSTET GYNECOL 1983;147:379-85.
11. Sweet RL, Robbie MO, Ohm-Smith M, Hadley WK. Comparative study ofpiperacillin versus cefoxitin in the treatment of obstetric and gynecologic infections. AM j OBSTET
GYNECOL 1983; 145:342-9.
12. Hemsell DL, Cunningham FG, DePalma RT, Nobles Bj,
Heard M, Hemsell PG. Cefotaxime sodium therapy for
endomyometritis following cesarean section: dose-finding
and comparative studies. Obstet GynecoI1983;62:489-97.
13. Hemsell DL, Santos-Ramos R, Cunningham FG, Nobles
Bj, Hemsell PG. Cefotaxime treatment for women with 
Volume 156
Number 5
community-acquired pelvic abscesses. AM J OBSTET GyNECOL 1985;151:771-7.
14. Sweet RL, Yonekura ML, Hill G, Gibbs RE, Eschenbach
DA. Appropriate use of antibiotics in serious obstetric and
gynecologic infections. AM J OBSTET GYNECOL 1983;
146:719-39.
Single-dose cephalosporin at vaginal hysterectomy
15. Antimicrobial therapy for gynecologic infections. ACOG
Technical Bulletin 1986 Oct:97:1-5.
16. Physicians' Desk Reference. Oradell, New Jersey: Medical
Economics Company, 1986: 1058-9.
Spontaneous clostridia gas gangrene of uterus associated with
endometrial malignancy
Jeffrey Braverman, M.D., Akinori Adachi, M.D., Michael Lev-Gur, M.D.,
Sheila Fallen, M.D., Murray Rosenzweig, M.D., Wilma Markus Greston, B.S., and
George J. Kleiner, M.D.
Bronx, New York
Only four patients with clostridia sepsis in association with gynecologic malignancy have been reported, all
of whom had prior diagnostic or therapeutic intervention. Our patient is the first documented case of such
clostridium sepsis that occurred spontaneously, i.e., without previous trauma, instrumentation, radiation or
chemotherapy. The value of aggressive management is reviewed. (AM J OSSTET GVNECOL 1987;156:1205-7.)
Key words: Gas gangrene. clostridia, sepsis, gynecologic malignancy, spontaneous
perforation of uterus
Gas gangrene and sepsis caused by clostridia organisms have been reported previously in association with
hematologic and gastrointestinal tract malignancies.
This report describes the first case of spontaneous clostridia sepsis leading to gas gangrene associated with a
uterine malignancy.
Case report
A 64-year-old Hindu woman, para 4-3-1-4, was admitted with a chief complaint of vaginal spotting and
lower abdominal pain for 3 months. She had no contributory history. Significant findings were suprapubic
tenderness, necrotic tissue protruding from the cervix,
and an enlarged uterus. A diagnosis of probable uterine
malignancy with secondary infection was made.
Shortly after admission, the patient manifested fever,
which responded to triple antibiotic therapy (ampicillin,
gentamicin, and clindamycin). The following day, she
developed clinical signs indicative of pulmonary embolism and peritonitis. Planned curettage was postponed. Pertinent laboratory findings revealed progressive anemia and bilirubinemia without hemolysis.
From the Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Infectious Diseases, and Radiology, Montefiore Medical Center/North Central
Bronx Hospital and Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
ReceivedforpublicationJune 30,1986; revised November 21,1986;
accepted December 30, 1986.
Reprint requests: George J. Kleiner, M.D., Director, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, North Central Bronx Hospital, 3424
Kossuth Ave., Bronx, NY 10467.
When blood cultures were found to be positive for Clostridium welch ii, x-ray films of the pelvis and a sonogram
of the uterus (Fig. 1) were obtained immediately; each
showed findings compatible with air. A decision was
made to perform immediate abdominal exploration
and possible total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral
salpingo-oophorectomy.
On examination, with the patient under anesthesia,
previous pelvic findings were confirmed, with the additional observation of crepitation. At laparotomy, the
uterus was enlarged to the size of 12 weeks' gestation
with multiple areas of severe necrosis and an area of
spontaneous perforation on the posterior fundus. Gas
bubbles and necrotic tissue were noted at the site of
perforation (Fig. 2). Total abdominal hysterectomy and
bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy were performed. After operation, the patient was transfused with three
units of packed red blood cells and a change in antibiotic to penicillin G (15 million units per day) was
made. The patient made an uneventful recovery and
underwent radiation therapy because of the spontaneous perforation.
The histopathologic examination revealed Stage IB
adenocarcinoma of the uterus with multiple areas of
imminent perforation and necrosis (Fig. 3). Gram stain
was positive for Clostridium welchii.
Comment
Clostridium welchii is present in the normal vaginal
flora of 1 % to 27% of healthy women. More than 95%
1205 