Abstract
Metronidazole has been proposed to prevent postoperative infections in gynecologic surgery. To define efficacy and adverse effects in patients undergoing abdominal and vaginal hysterectomy, we conducted a double-blind study in 106 and 38 patients, respectively. They were allocated randomly to receive either 500 mg metronidazole intravenously or a placebo, every 6 hours for three doses, starting on call to the operating room. Clinical and laboratory data were recorded daily for subsequent analysis by use of nonparametric techniques. Data were analyzed separately for patients undergoing abdominal or vaginal hysterectomy. The two treatment groups did not differ in age, weight, indication for hysterectomy, surgical procedure, or preoperative genital bacterial flora. After abdominal hysterectomy, postoperative infection rates were identical in the two treatment groups (pelvic, vaginal vault, or major infection, 6%; urinary tract infection, 11%). Unexplained fever requiring antibiotic treatment occurred in three patients receiving metronidazole and two patients receiving placebo. Although the fever index calculated from the duration of temperature above 37.3 °C (oral) was lower in the metronidazole-treated group (13.5 versus 23.7 degree-hours C); the number of patients requiring antibiotics and the average duration of hospital stay were similar in the two groups. Subjectively, metronidazole was as well tolerated as the placebo. Recurrency rates of anaerobes by culture of vaginal swabs were reduced for several postoperative days after metronidazole prophylaxis, but this regimen prolonged a high rate of vaginal enterococci and gram-negative rods. After vaginal hysterectomy, pelvic infection occurred in Math Eq (22%) patients receiving placebo (including one patient with a foreign body left in the vagina) and Math Eq (15%) patients receiving metronidazole. Urinary tract infections occurred in Math Eq versus Math Eq in the placebo and the metronidazole groups, respectively; suprapubic cystostomy site infection in Math Eq versus Math Eq and unexplained fever in Math Eq versus Math Eq. There was no difference in the duration of hospitalization and courses of other antibiotic administered. The results do not support the use of intravenous preoperative metronidazole for prophylaxis in abdominal hysterectomy. The small number of patients undergoing vaginal hysterectomy precludes definitive conclusion on the efficacy of metronidazole in this situation, but our results stress the need for additional studies.