Prophylactic cephaloridine in the prevention
of postoperative pelvic infections in
premenopausal women undergoing vaginal
hysterectomy
WILLIAM J. LEDGER, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.
RICHARD L. SWEET, M.D.
JOHN T. HEADINGTON, M.D.
Ann Arbor, Michigan
A prospective double-blind study was performed utilizing 3 Gm. of cephaloridine
or placebo on the day of operation in premenopausal women undergoing
vaginal hysterectomy. In approximately two years, 100 of 138 women eligible for the
study elected to participate; 50 patients received placebo and 50 received active
drug. The preoperative profile of the two groups of patients was similar.
Postoperatively, there were statistically significant digerences in the clinical courses of
the two groups of patients. In those women receiving cephaloridine prophylaxis,
fewer patients had postoperative morbidity (p < 0.025). This seemed directly
related to the decreased incidence of postoperative pelvic infections in the antibiotic
group (p < 0.005). The implications of these findings are discussed.
S T A N D A R D M E D I C A L teaching usually
condemns prophylactic antibiotics, based
upon earlier observations. Initially, there was
widespread prophylactic use of antibiotics to
prevent all infections. Most prospective
studies indicated that there was little if any
beneficial effect of such regimens. More
important, epidemiologic studies provided
From the Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology (Drs. Ledger and Sweet)
and the Department of Pathology. (Dr.
Headington), University of Michigan
Medical Center and University Hospital.
This study was supported by Grant No.
336540 of the Eli Lilly Company,
Indianapolis, Indiana.
Received for publication June 27, 1972.
Revised August 18, 197.2.
Accepted August 23, 1972.
Reprint requests: William J. Ledger,
M.D., Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, University of Southern
California School of Medicine, 1240 N.
State St., Los Angeles, California 90033.
evidence that such prophylaxis might lead to
the selection of antibiotic-resistant organisms.
Recently, there have been a number of
new references to prophylactic antibiotics,
suggesting that this subject should be reevaluated. Goosenberg and associates’ in
1969 found that a combination of intramuscular penicillin and streptomycin given preoperatively and for five days postoperatively
markedly lowered postoperative infectious
morbidity. Weissbgrg and associate? in 1971
reported that a regimen of intravenous penicillin and intramuscular kanamycin, given
preoperatively and postoperatively for three
to five days, significantly reduced postoperative infectious problems in clinic patients
undergoing cesarean section who had previously been in labor. Allen and associates3 in
1972 demonstrated that preoperative and
postoperative use of cephalothin for five days
reduced both infections and the length of
postoperative hospitalization following ab- 
Volume 115
Number 6
Ceahaloridine in prevention of postoperative pelvic infections 767
dominal and vaginal hysterectomy. All of
these studies demonstrated clinical benefits
to the groups of patients evaluated.
In assessing these studies, we found two
areas in which the experimental design could
theoretically be criticized. First, there was
poor specificity of study aims. The prevention
of postoperative morbidity is too all-encompassing a goal. A decision to use prophylactic
antibiotics is better determined by the need
to achieve a specific qualitative effect. For
example, a thoracic surgeon may use prophylactic antibiotics, not to prevent all infectious
complications, but to avoid postoperative
Staphylococcus aureus infections. Second, the
postoperative use of powerful systemic antibiotics for several days reported in all three
of these series did not seem to be prophylactic
alone, but instead both prophylactic and
therapeutic. Widespread use of long-term
prophylaxis can have a profound effect on
the character of nosocomial flora with drastic
consequences for patients infected with resistant bacteria.
Postoperative morbidity remains a serious
problem on our gynecology service. We have
previously documented the high incidence
of severe postoperative pelvic infections in
premenopausal women undergoing vaginal
hysterectomy.” Hospitalization was prolonged
in such cases; at times a laparotomy was required for the removal of an adnexal abscess,
and on occasion death from sepsis occurred.
Such problems were frequent enough to have
us consider a study of antibiotic prophylaxis.
A newly proposed regimen of antibiotic
prophylaxis was both qualitatively and epidemiologically more appealing. Polk and
Lopez-Mayo? recently reported that a total
of 3 Gm. of cephaloridine given only on the
day of operation significantly decreased the
incidence of abdominal wound infections following colectomy. This effectiveness in
operations with frequent contamination by
lower bowel organisms suggested its feasibility for trial in vaginal surgery.
As a consequence, therefore, of serious
postoperative pelvic infections following
vaginal hysterectomy and the documented
success in surgery of a short course of antibiotic prophylaxis, we determined to study.
such a regimen in premenopausal women.
This report documents our experience with
prophylactic cephaloridine at the University
of Michigan Medical Center.
Materials and methods
All premenopausal women undergoing
vaginal hysterectomy from May 1, 1970,
through May 12, 1972, at the University of
Michigan Medical Center were eligible for
the study. Those patients xvho agreed to
participate and who signed a written consent
form were assigned by the pharmacy service
to receive either placebo or active drug according to a table of random numbers prepared before beginning the study. The patients were given either 1 Gm. of active drug
or a similar volume of placebo ( 1) on call
to the operating room, (2) on return from
the recovery room, and (3) at bedtime the
evening after operation. When the uterus
had been removed, a small sample of the
vaginal apex and a sample of peripheral
venous blood was obtained for both aerobic
and anaerobic cultures. Postoperatively another RUN (blood urea nitrogen) determination was done. The code identifying
placebo or active drug was broken after the
patient had been discharged and the clinical
summary sheets had been completed.
Six separate groups of women were f2-
eluded : postmenopausal women, xvomen
with a history of penicillin or cephalosporin
allergy, women with a preoperative BUN
above 20 mg. per 100 ml., women already
receiving prophylactic antibiotics for medical
reasons, women who did not want to participate in the study, and those instances in
which the vaginal approach was decided
upon in the operating room. Patients with a
penicillin allergy were excluded because of
the potential cross-sensitivity reaction to
rephalosporin. Cephaloridine in large doses
(4 Gm. or greater per day) has been nephrotoxic, particularly in women with impaired
renal function. A recent study suggests that
3 Gm. of cephaloridine daily has no adverse
effects on renal function in patients with
normal pretreatment kidney function.” 
768 Ledger, Sweet, and Headington Match 13, 1973
Am. J. Ohstet. Ggnecol.
Table I. Clinical characteristics
Placebo
(50
patients)
Age:
Range
Mean
23-54 yr. “O-53 yr.
35.4 yr. 35 yr.
Race:
Caucasian 44 patients 45 patients
Negro 6 patients 5 patients
No. of catheterizations:
Range o-3 o-3
Mean 0.90 0.92
Indwelling catheter:
No. of patients 42 42
Mean duration 2.6 days 2.68 days
Duration of operation:
Range 25-270 min. 45-200 min.
Mean 98.2 min. 99.92 min.
Vaginal hysterectomy:
Without colpor- 35 32
rhaphy
With colporrhaphy 15 18
Table II. Microbiologic studies performed
Antibiotics Placebo
Total vaginal cultures 46 46
No growth 11 4
Only aerobes 23 33
Only anaerobes 8 6
Both anaerobes and aerobes 4 3
Total blood cultures 47 47
Positive 3 0
There were 100 women who participated
in the evaluation of prophylactic cephaloridine : 50 received active drug and 50 received
placebo. During this time interval 164 vaginal hysterectomies were done at the University of Michigan Medical Center. Of the 64
women who were not in this study, 26 were
postmenopausal, 19 had a history of penicillin allergy, five were already receiving prophylactic antibiotics for cardiac indications,
10 did not choose to participate, and on four
occasions the decisions for the vaginal approach was made in the operating room.
There were no patients with elevated preoperative BUN.
The management of postoperative infections followed the pattern previously reported from our gynecology service.’ The
diagnosis of a urinary tract infection was
made on the basis of a colony count of greater
than 100,000 per milliliter from urine obtained by catheterization and, on a few occasions, a clean voided urine. In a few
instances, the diagnosis was made on immediate microscopic evaluation of a catheter
urine specimen, when white cells and bacteria
were discovered. On these occasions, such
antimicrobial agents as the sulfas or the
nitrofurantoins were usually chosen. Postoperative pelvic infections included vaginal
cuff collection, pelvic cellulitis, and postoperative adnexal abscess. These diagnoses
were based upon clinical findings and the
mode of management. Patients with a vaginal cuff collection had findings limited to
the cuff, and were treated by surgical drainage alone. The patients with a pelvic cellulitis had more diffuse pelvic findings and
were treated with systemic antibiotics. A
laparotomy was performed in patients with
a postoperative adnexal abscess and the diagnosis was confirmed pathologically. The diagnosis of septic pelvic thrombophlebitis was
made in those patients with postoperative
pelvic infections who continued a febrile
course despite systemic antibiotics and required heparin before they became afebrile.
Results
There were no significant differences in
the clinical characteristics of patients in the
placebo or antibiotic group. The details of
this comparison are noted in Table I.
Preoperative immunoglobulins were determined in 44 patients receiving antibiotics
and in 47 patients receiving placebo. The
means and standard deviations did not vary
in the two groups of women. Three patients
had IgG levels below the range of normal,
one from the antibiotic group and two from
the placebo group. They did not have serious
postoperative infectious morbidity.
Both pre- and postoperatively BUN values
were obtained in the majority of patients.
No elevations of the postoperative BUN were 
Volume 115
Numba 6
Ceahaloridine in prevention of postoperative pelvic infections 769
noted in either the antibiotic or the placebo Table III. Organism recovered from vaginal
group. cultures
There were some differences noted in the
gross characteristics of microbiologic studies
performed after completion of the operation.
Table II lists the findings. The number of
vaginal cultures with no growth occurred
more frequently in the antibiotic group. The
difference noted was not statistically significant when continuity correction was performed. All three of the positive blood cultures were obtained from patients of the antibiotic group. The organisms recovered,
HuenzophiEus pa.rain@uenzae, coagulase-negative staphylococcus, and Bacillus species,
were not recovered from vaginal cultures
obtained at the same time. There was no correlation between these positive blood cultures
and the later development of morbidity.
Antibiotic Placebo
I. Gram-positive aerobes:
1. Coagulase-negative
staphylococcus
2. Streptococcus uiridans
3. Group D beta-streptococC”S
4. Diphtheroids
,5. Gamma streptococcus
6. Group B beta-streptococCUS
7. Lactobacilli
8. Micrococcus luteus
Total
18
8
8
9
‘,
1
0
0
G
Anaerobic organisms were frequently isolated from the vaginal cultures. They were
recovered from 21 of the total number of 92
vaginal cultures (23 per cent) and accounted
for 27 per cent of the positive vaginal cultures.
II. Gram-negatiue aerobes:
1. Escherichia coli
2. Enterobacter cloacae
3. Proteus mirabilis
4. Klebsiella
i. Herella uaginicola
6. Mima polymorpha
Total
6
1
0
I
0
1
s
There jvas a similar range of vaginal organisms obtained from the placebo and antibiotic groups. The types and frequency of
organisms recovered are listed in Table III.
There were more gram-positive aerobes recovered in the placebo group, particuIarly
coagulase-negative staphylococci.
III. Others:
1. Candida
IV. Anaerobes:
1. Propionibacterium acnes
2. Peptococcus
3. Peptostreptococcus
4. Bacteroides sp.
5. Clostridium innocuum
6. Bifidobacterium sp.
Total
5
3
9
10
1
0
1
1
-
30
10
1
1
0
1
0
13
1
5
3
,I
5
1
1
17
-
0
4
:’
1
2
0
1
lo
- --
There were differences in the types of postoperative morbidity seen in these 100 study
patients. The findings are listed in Table IV.
The totals listed are greater than 50 in each
group, because some patients had more than
one site of morbidity. There were significantly
more patients without morbidity in the antibiotic group (p < 0.025). This lessened incidence was directly related to the significantly
fewer pelvic infections in the antibiotic group
(p < 0.005).
The category “othrr” morbidity needs further description. Of the six patients listed
as “other” in the antibiotic group, three had
pulmonary problems. One patient had
atelectasis and was treated by intermittent
positive-pressure breathing. One patient had
n bronchitis, another pneumonitis, and both
were given systemic antibiotics. One patient
had a postoperative Candida vulvovaginitis
treated with topical myostatin; one patient
had a deep vein thrombophlebitis of one
lower extremity and received heparin. Another patient was found to have extravasation of urine into the right retroperitoneal
area following an injury to the bladder discovered and repaired at the time of operation. There were four patients in the “other”
category in the placebo group. One patient
had atelectasis treated with tracheal suctioning: one had a subcutaneous abscess on her
back in the postoperative period that required incision and drainage; one had a deep
vein thrombophlebitis of one lower extremity
requiring heparin; one had an abdominal 
770 Ledger, Sweet, and Headington
Table IV. Postoperative morbidity One patient had a vaginal cuff collection
Antithat required drainage alone, two patients
biotics Placebo had a pelvic cellulitis that required systemic
1. Total patients 50 50 antibiotics, and one had a postoperative ad2. No infection 32 20 nexal abscess that required a second opera3. Urinary tract infection 9 14 tion.
4. Other 6 4 5. Pelvic infections 4 17 Of the 33 premenopausal women who did
not participate in the study and who I\-ere
Table V. Clinical measurements of
postoperative infectious morbidity
1 Antibiotics 1 Placebo
1. Standard temperature morbidity 12 patients 23 patients
2. Postoperative
antibiotics 14 patients 29 patients
3. Hospital stay: 8.6 + 4.2 9.9 ? 3.6
mean + S.D. days days
Table VI. Quantities of antibiotics used in
the postoperative period
Penicillin (mu.) 326
Sulfisoxazole (Gm.) 268
Ampicillin (Cm.) 106
Tetracycline (Gm. ) 49
Kanamycin (Gm. ) 19
Glindamycin ( Gm. ) 0
Cephalexin (Gm.) 0
Chloramphenicol (Gm.) 0
Nitrofurantoin (Gm.) 4
Antibiotics 1 Placebo
786.2
364
90
223.5
72
24
20
9
4
wound infection following removal of a postoperative adnexal abscess.
There were a variety of pelvic infections
noted in the two groups. Of the 17 postoperative pelvic infections in the placebo
group, one patient had a vaginal cuff collection requiring drainage alone ; 13 patients
had pelvic cellulitis and required systemic
antibiotics, two of these 13 patients also had
a vaginal cuff collection, Three patients had
postoperative adnexal infections that required laparotomy and removal of the abscess. Of these 17 women with postoperative
pelvic infections, three received heparin for
septic pelvic thrombophlebitis. There were
four pelvic infections in the antibiotic group.
not on prophylactic antibiotics in the study,
16 (48 per cent) had one or more sites of
postoperative morbidity. These included six
patients with urinary tract infections, one
with atelectasis, and 10 with pelvic infections, of whom eight had a pelvic cellulitis,
including two with an associated cuff collection Two other patients had a postoperative adnexal abscess.
Some gross measurements of postoperative
morbidity show differences between the
placebo and antibiotic groups of patients.
These are tabulated in Table V. Standard
temperature morbidity was met when a patient had a temperature of 100.4’ F. or
greater on any two of the first 10 postoperative days excluding the first 24 hours. The
difference between the number of patients
with standard temperature morbidity in the
placebo and active groups is statistically
significant (p < 0.025). Significantly more
patients in the placebo group received postoperative antibiotics (p < 0.005). The average hospital stay was less in the antibiotic
group, but the differences are not significant.
The patients in the placebo group received a far greater amount of antibiotics
during their hospitalization. Table VI compares the quantities used in the two groups
of patients.
The postoperative timing of the diagnosis
of postoperative infections was similar in the
two groups of patients.
There was a difference in the types of
organisms recovered from the postoperative
urinary tract and pelvic infections in the
placebo and active groups. The range of
organisms recovered is noted in Table VII.
Organisms such as Pseudomonas, Klebsiella
pneumoniae, Enterobacter cloacae, and Candida were recovered from patients receiving
active drug, while Enterobacter cloacae and 
iiumbri (i
Ceahaloridine in prevention of postoperative pelvic infections 771
Proteus tvere recovered from the placebo Table VII. Organisms recovered from the
Rroup. sites of infection
Comment Placebo
Clinical correlation. Premenopausal women undergoing vaginal hysterectomy who received cephaloridine on the day of operation
had significantly fewer postoperative pelvic
infections than those receiving placebo. A
comparison of the patients not eligible for
the study who bvere not given prophylactic
antibiotics shows a similar high frequency of
pelvic infections.
I.
II.
Escherichia coli 9
Streptococcus
faecalis ‘2
Coagulase-negative
staphylococcus 1
Proteus mirabilis 1
The prophylactic use of antibiotics had a
similar impact upon indirect measurements
of postoperative infectious morbidity. Standard temperature morbidity occurred less
frequently in patients receiving active drug.
Of themselves, these temperature measurements do not represent a significant medical
problem to the physician and should not be
used as the sole justification for prophylactic
antibiotics.
Urinary tract infectigons:
Streptococcus faecalis 3
Escherichia coli 2
Citrobacter 1
Klebsiella pneumoniae 1
Enterobacter cloacae 1
Pseudomonas 1
Postoperatke pelvic
infections:
Coagulase-negative
staphylococcus 1
Peptococcus NCDC
Group I 1
Pfptostreptococcus
NCDC Group II 1
Candida albicans 1
It is clear that this burst of prophylactic
antibiotics will not prevent all postoperative
infectious problems; the numbers of postoperative urinary tract infections and infections of other sites were not eliminated by
such a regimen. This was not unexpected, for
previous studies have failed to demonstrate
beneficial effects of prophylactic antibiotics
in the prevention of urinary tract infections
in patients with an indwelling catheter.8
Escherichia coli 10
Streptococcus
faecalis 7
Coagulase-negative
staphylococcus J
Lactobacilli 3
Diphtheroids 3
Streptococcus
rliridans ‘>
Gamma streptococ.
CUS 9
.
Dip1 OGOCCU~S
pneumoniae 1
Group B beta
streptococcus 1
Micrococcus
luteus 1
Proteus mirabilis 1
Enterobacter
cloacae 1
Clostridium
perfringens 4
Bacteroides
corrodens 1
Peptococcus
NCDC Group I 1
The prophylactic antibiotic regimen used
in this study did not delay the clinical recognition of postoperative infection. It also
seems unlikely this short course of antibiotics
will mask serious problems of morbidity. The
patient with extravasation of urine into the
right retroperitoneal area had a markedly
elevated temperature within 24 hours of
operation despite prophylactic cephaloridine.
More data are needed to confirm this assumption that severe infectious problems will
be recognized early with “burst” prophylaxis.
Antibiotic therapy. The preoperative use
of the bactericidal antibiotic cephalosporin
seems to be an important factor in the clinical success of this prophylactic regimen.
Esperimental studies of wound infections in
animals demonstrate that the greatest limitation of bacterial growth occurs when antibiotics are given before operative field soiling.!’ A patient with a therapeutic blood level
of antibiotic at the time of operation will
also be assured of having tissue levels. Probably more important to the vaginal surgeon,
this blood level assures the presence of antibiotic in the serum that collects in tissue
spaces created by the operative techniques.
The bactericidal capability also appears to
be important because a previous evaluation
of the bacteriostatic antibiotic chloramphenico1 as a prophylactic agent in vaginal hysterectomy demonstrated no benefit of such a
regimen.’ 
772 Ledger, Sweet, and Headington
The agent used in this series, cephalosporin, is a bactericidal antibiotic with a
broad spectrum of antibacterial activity. It
is effective against most of the gram-positive
organisms found in the vagina except Streptococcus faecalis. It is effective against most
gram-negative organisms with the exception
of members of the Pseudomonas species and
Bacteroides species. Review of antibiotic
usage (see Table VI) shows that this agent
has not been widely employed in the routine
treatment of postoperative gynecologic infections on our gynecology service.
The widespread use of antibiotics incurs
some potential risk of increasing the prevalence of resistant nosocomial strains. This has
been repeatedly documented. A neurosurgical service reported an epidemic of Klebsiella
aerogenes infections that ended when antibiotic prophylaxis was withdrawn.l” A general surgical service found a marked rise in
Klebsiella infections that paralleled a 72 per
cent patient usage of kanamycinll A burn
unit demonstrated an increase in gentamicinresistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa following
extensive use of a gentamicin ointment.*’ In
our own studies, vve did find a clustering of
uncommon organisms in the active group
(see Table VII). In those patients with a
postoperative urinary tract infection organisms such as Pseudomonas, Klebsiella pneumoniae, and Enterobacter cloacae were recovered from patients receiving cephaloridine while only one patient had a Proteus
infection in the placebo group. Of greater
concern was the widespread postoperative
Candida vulvovaginitis in one patient who
received cephaloridine and the one patient
with a postoperative adnexal abscess in the
cephaloridine group from whom only Candida was recovered. Cause and effect are not
clear in the latter case, for the patient also
had a 10 day course of tetracycline in the
immediate postoperative period for a urinary
tract infection which could influence the
emergence of Candida. Nevertheless, recovery of resistant organisms when such prophylactic regimens are used must remain a concern. Although these are disturbing microbiologic findings, the presence of those
bacteria did not result in any major clinical
problems. None of the patients from whom
these organisms were recovered had a more
prolonged convalescence than other patients
with similar sites of infection.
The impact of this prophylactic regimen
upon total antibiotic usage on a gynecology
service should not be great. In the over-all
evaluation of antibiotic usage in these two
groups of patients (Table VI), it seems clear
the quantitative use of antibiotics during
hospitalization was considerably less in those
patients receiving prophylaxis. Also, the increase in the numbers of patients receiving
antibiotics would not be large if such a regimen was instituted. The vaginal hysterectomies performed on premenopausal women
during this time interval represent approximately 3.7 per cent, of the gynecologic service discharges. A previous surveillance survey of our gynecology service suggests that
approximately 43 per cent of all patients,
pre- and postmenopausal, undergoing vaginal
hysterectomy receive postoperative antibiotics.’ A service policy of prophylactic antibiotics for all premenopausal patients undergoing vaginal hysterectomy would increase
the percentage of women receiving antibiotics
on our gynecologic inpatient service by only
2 per cent.
Mechanisms. Microbiologic cultures of the
vagina obtained in the operating room did
not clarify the mechanisms of prophylactic
antibiotic protection against pelvic infections.
Although no bacterial growth was reported
more frequently in patients receiving prophylaxis, such events represent a minority of
the patients.
There are influences on the results of
qualitative microbiologic studies which are
difficult to assess. The quantities of organisms
contaminating the operative site are not
known. Rotheram and Schick,13 in an evaluation of infected abortions, have demonstrated the importance of quantitative bacterial counts in the evaluation of possible
bacterial pathogens. This requires immediate
plating of the specimen and, within the limi- 
Volume 115
Number 6
Ceohaloridine in prevention of postoperative pelvic infections 773
tations of our hospital setting, this quantitative approach was not possible.
Our analysis of postoperative blood cultures also did not clarify the mechanism of
protection by these antibiotics. Previous experimental work in animals has demonstrated
that septicemia can be used as a method to
induce experimental wound infecti0n.l’ Since
vaginal hysterectomy is an operation utilizing
a microbiologically contaminated field, we
were interested to see if bacteremia does occur. There were three positive blood cultures
among the 94 taken (3.2 per cent), and the
organisms recovered were Haemophilus
parainfluenzae, coagulase-negative staphylococcus, and a Bacillus species. Clinically, the
positive blood culture did not correlate with
postoperative morbidity and the nature of
the organisms recovered suggested that they
might have been contaminants. Alternatively,
this bac.teremia may occur on occasion without clinical significance.
Obstetricians and gynecologists need to remain aware of the importance of anaerobic
bacteria as vaginal contaminants and potential pathogens in postoperative pelvic infections. It seems clear that anaerobic organisms
can frequently be recovered from the vagina
of premenopausal women at the completion
of a vaginal hysterectomy. The presence of
fresh transport media in the operating room
undoubtedly contributed to the recovery of
anaerobic organisms in 27 per cent of the
positive cultures. This is in contrast to a recent evaluation of bacterial contaminants of
the vaginal cuff in 100 patients undergoing
abdominal hysterectomy wherein no anaerobes were recovered.‘5
Future management and planning. A number of factors need to be evaluated before
a decision is made to use prophylactic antibiotics. ( 1) The degree of risk must be ascertained. A recent report suggests that there
is minimal danger of pelvic infection in such
patients undergoing vaginal hysterect0my.l”
If this is true in specific circumstances, then
there is no justification for a prophylactic
antibiotic regimen. (2) Next, it should be
clear that such a regimen will not eliminate
all pelvic infections. In our own series, postoperative pelvic infections, including an adnexal abscess, tvere found in the antibiotictreated group. In addition, one patient \vho
received prophylactic antibiotics because of
a cardiac lesion had a severe postoperative
pelvic infection following unrecognized sigmoid perforation that \vas not discovrrcd
until a laparotomy ~vas performed sevrral
hours later to control pedicle bleeding. An
infection secondary to massive bacterial contamination was not prevented by thp preoperative use of antibiotics. Prophylactic
antibiotics will never be a substitute for good
operative technique. (3) This prophylactic
regimen may not be effective in all hospitals.
It has been demonstrated in general surgery?
that success with a prophylactic rcgimrn ma)
vary from senice to service.” (4) Thr: choice
of antibiotic in such a regimen is probabl)
important. Recent studies of prophylactic
antibiotics in obstetrics and gynecolo,ey have
sho\vn clinical success with bactericidal
agents such as the cephalosporins alon? and
combinations of penicillin and streptomycin’
or kanamycin.? A bacteriostatic ayrnt,
chloramphenicol, was not effective.’ There
are also other agents such as ampirillin whose
antibacterial range suggests they might br
effective. This question can be resole-ed only
by prospective study. (5‘1 Finally. a difficulty
with all of the successful regimens is thr
problem of penicillin allergy: 19 of the 133
women (14 per cent1 of those cliciblr for
this study g-a\-e a history of pcnic*illin allergy-far greater than thr expectrd numbers, but not at variance with the figurca of
15 per cent that has been quoted for hospitalized patients. The distinctive macrllopapular rash of ampicillin, which is probably not
a true penicillin allergy, simply adds to these
numbers.‘” This does eliminate a significant
se,qment of hospitalized patients from this
type of antibiotic regimen. Thrsc a~‘(‘ the
considerations necessary for the evnll~ation of
such regimen. If, on balance. more factors
favor a trial of prophylactic antibiotics, the
decision regarding their t=mploymrnt should
be affirmative. 
774 Ledger, Sweet, and Headington
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
REFERENCES
Goosenberg, J., Emich, J. P., and Schwarz,
R. H.: AM. J. OBSTET. GTNECOL. 105: 503,
1969.
Weissberg, S. M., Edward, N. L., and
q’leary, J. A.: Obstet. Gynecol. 38: 290,
1971.
AIIen, J. L., Rampone, J. I:., and Wheeless,
C. R.: Obstet. Gvnecol. 39: 218. 1972.
Ledger, W. J.: CIin. Obstet. bynecol. 12:
265, 1969.
Polk, H. K., and Lopez-Mayor, J. F.: Surgery
66: 97, 1969.
Fair, W. R.: J. Ural. 107: 2, 1972.
Ledger, W. J., Reite, A., and Headington,
J. T.: AM. J. OBSTET. GYSECOL. 113: 662,
1972.
Hodari, A. H., and Hodgkinson, C. P.: AM.
J. OBSTET. GYNECOL. 95: 153, 1966.
Alexander, J. W., and Altemeier, W. A.: Surg.
Gynecol. Obstet. 120: 243, 1965.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
Shcb 15. lY73
.4x1. .J. Obstct. Gynwol.
Price, D. J. E., and Sleigh, T. D.: Lancer
2: 1213, 1970.
Gardner, P., and Smith, A. H.: Ann. Intern.
Med. 71: 1, 1969.
Shulman, J. A., Terry, P. M., and Hough,
C. E.: J. Infect. Dis. 124: 518, 1971.
Rotheram, E. A., and Schick, S. F.: Am. J.
Med. 46: 80, 1969.
Howe, C. W.: Surgery 66: 570, 1969.
Nissen, E. D., and Goldstein, A. I.: AM. J.
OHSTET. GTNECOL. 113: 111, 1972.
Atkinson, S. M., and Chappell, S. M.: Obstet.
Gynecol. 39: 759, 1972.
Karl, R. C., Mertz, J. J., Veith, F. J., and
Dineen, P.: N. Engl. J. Med. 275: 305, 1966.
Bierman, C. W., Pierson, W. E., Zeitz, S. J.,
Hoffman, L. S., and Van Arsdel, Jr., P. P.:
J. Am. Med. Assoc. 220: 1098, 1972. 