Home vs Hospital Care for
Schizophrenics
Benjamin Pasamanick, MD, Columbus, Ohio, Frank R. Scarpitti, PhD, New
Brunswick, NJ, Mark Lefton, PhD, Cleveland, Simon Dinitz, PhD, Columbus,
John J. Wernert, MD, Louisville, and Harold McPheeters, MD, Frankfort, Ky
In order to evaluate the effects of the
treatment of schizophrenics at home under public health nursing care and a
drug regimen, 193 patients were randomly assigned to either a drug home care
group, a placebo home care group, or a
hospital control group. The findings in
the first 18 months of the program indicate that: (1) the drug patients have
been more successful in remaining at
home than the placebo cases, (2) this
superiority increases with length of time
on the project and, (3) home care patients, drug and placebo, spend a greater
percentage of treatment time at home
than those patients assigned to the hospital control group. Family, economic,
and psychiatric problems encountered by
patients remaining in the community indicate the need for a more comprehensive
program.
IN HIS MESSAGE to Congress on "Mental Ill¬
ness and Mental Retardation," on Feb 5, 1963,
the late President Kennedy '
strongly urged a change
in existing practices in the care of the mentally ill.
The message decried the lag and neglect in the
treatment and prevention of psychiatric disorders
and the corresponding inadequacies of present fa¬
cilities, the shortages of trained staff, the dehuman¬
izing effects of massive institutions, and the custo¬
dial nature of many mental hospitals. Despite the
huge expenditures of $1.8 billion in direct publicoutlays for services to the mentally ill, 45% of the
patients in state mental hospitals have been in
continuous residence for ten years or more; the
average length of hospitalization for schizophrenia
is still 11 years.
Optimistically, and with a view to stimulating
concerted action by federal, state, local, and pri¬
vate agencies, the President said '
:
I propose a national mental health program to assist in
the inauguration of a wholly new emphasis and approach to
care for the mentlly ill. This approach relies primarily upon
the new knowledge and new drugs acquired and developed
in recent years which make it possible for most of the men¬
tally ill to be successfully and quickly treated in their own
communities and returned to a useful place in society.
These breakthroughs have rendered obsolete the traditional
methods of treatment which imposed upon the mentally ill
a social quarantine, a prolonged or permanent confinement
in huge, unhappy mental hospitals where they were out of
sight and forgotten.
In order to prevent the alienation of patients
from family, friends, and community by prolonged
confinement in mental hospitals, this new approach
would involve the creation of comprehensive com¬
munity mental health centers. These centers would
serve to focus community resources and interest
in all aspects of mental health care. Specific func¬
tions would include diagnostic and evaluation ser¬
vices, emergency care units, in- and out-patient
treatment, day and night care facilities, foster home
placements, and mental health information and
education programs.
Whether or not the comprehensive community
mental health center will replace the mental hos¬
pital in the foreseeable future or, even as projected,
reduce the present 530,000 mental hospital popu¬
lation by half within a decade, is subject to dis¬
cussion. The ability and willingness of families to
tolerate deviant or asocial family members in the
highly complex urban environment remains proble¬
matic. Apart from family considerations, the entire
conception of this community mental health center
program rests largely on the utilization of the From the Research Division, Psychiatric Institute and Hospital, Ohio
State University Health Center, Columbus.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a Florida International University Medical Library User on 06/09/2015
newer drug therapies to alleviate the acute and
often bizarre symptoms of mental illness so that
patients may continue to live at home and perform
the ordinary activities of daily life.
No systematic test of the feasibility of home care
as a substitute for hospitalization for schizophrenics
in a controlled study has been done. The results
of such an experimental program are reported in
this paper.
The Program
The Research Division of the Psychiatric Insti¬
tute and Hospital of the Ohio State University
Health Center, in conjunction with the Kentucky
Department of Mental Health, designed and insti¬
tuted a study to test the effectiveness of home care
compared with hospitalization for schizophrenia.
In the late summer of 1961 an Institute Treatment
Center was opened in downtown Louisville. This
center is staffed by a study coordinator, two parttime psychiatrists, a psychologist, a psychiatric
social worker, and five nurses with public health
service experience. After an initial period of inten¬
sive training of nurses and other personnel, the
achievement of at least minimal community coop¬
eration for the program, and the pilot testing of
procedures and measures, the first patients were
accepted into the project in December, 1961. All
patients meet the following minimal criteria:
1. All must have schizophrenia of sufficient se¬
verity to require hospitalization.
2. None of the patients may exhibit homicidal
or suicidal tendencies.
3. All must be adults, aged 18 to 60 years.
4. All must reside in Jefferson County (Louis¬
ville )
or in one of nine surrounding counties within
a radius of approximately 60 miles of downtown
Louisville.
5. Family members of the patient, typically the
husband, wife, or parent, must express willingness
to supervise the patient in the home. This qualifi¬
cation is most important, since periodic data on
patient functioning have to be secured from family
members.
Patient Intake Procedures—Shortly after com¬
mitment to Central State Hospital, and occasionally
the same day, a psychiatrist stationed at the hos¬
pital, but attached to the project, examines the
patient to determine eligibility for inclusion in the
study. When a patient meets the initial screening
criteria, pertinent information is relayed to the
Institute Treatment Center so that the social worker
may initiate arrangements for interviewing the
family. Within a few days after hospital admission,
and usually before treatment is begun, the eligible
patient and his family are brought to the Institute
Treatment Center for further evaluation. If the
psychiatrist at the center concurs in the diagnosis
and the family expresses willingness to assume re¬
sponsibility for care of the patient in the home,
the patient is officially admitted to the study. In
the process of making the determination of eligi¬
bility, an extensive systematic social history is taken
from the family, psychiatric data are collected,
and a battery of psychological tests is administered
to the patient.
Patient Placement in Groups.—Using a deck of
random cards the patient is assigned to one of
three groups by the study coordinator. Forty per
cent of the patients are assigned to the drug
group. These patients are returned to the commu¬
nity under family supervision on an appropriate
psychopharmacological agent as prescribed by the
Institute Treatment Center psychiatrists. Thirty
per cent of the patients are assigned to the placebo
group and, except for the substitution of a placebo for the active drug, are managed in the same way
in the community as are the drug group patients.
The remaining 30% of the patients are returned
to the hospital and serve as controls for the placebo
and drug groups for testing later patient and fam¬
ily functioning. A separate deck of random cards is
used to assign nonhospitalized patients referred
by community agencies and private physicians into
the drug and placebo groups. The 41 nonhospital¬
ized subjects were found to be similar in outcome
to the hospitalized patients permitting their pool¬
ing in our subsequent analysis.
None of the clinic or ancillary personnel on the
project knows whether the home care patients are
in the drug or placebo groups; this prevents such
information from contaminating the results.
Home Care for Drug and Placebo Patients—The
public health nurse responsible for the patient
makes her first visit to the home shortly after the
patient is returned to his family. Thereafter, the
same nurse visits the patient once a week for the
first three months, bimonthly for the second three
months, and monthly thereafter. On each visit the
nurse leaves the prescribed quantity of drugs or
placebos. ( The placebos are identical in size, shape,
and color to the active drugs.) After each such
home visit the nurse submits a written report to
the psychiatrist, who reviews the patient's prog¬
ress. Once each month the nurse interviews the
responsible relative (husband, wife, or parent)
using a standardized schedule.
Patient problems seldom coincide with the sched¬
uled visits of the nurse. As a result the center
maintains a 24-hour telephone answering service
and special visits to a patient and family are not
infrequent. The patient may also see the psychia¬
trist whenever he wishes or whenever the nurse
deems it advisable. Regularly scheduled psychi¬
atric visits, however, occur every three months. The
patient and family may see the social worker at
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a Florida International University Medical Library User on 06/09/2015
their own request or as recommended by the nurse
or psychiatrist. Finally, the battery of psychological
tests is readministered after 6 and again after 18
months of home care.
These procedures are designed (a) to evaluate
the feasibility of maintaining schizophrenics at
home under public health nursing care on a drug
regimen, (b) to measure just how well or poorly
home care patients are functioning psychologically,
socially, in their work roles, and as family mem¬
bers, and (c) to determine the effects on family
patterns and activities of keeping a patient at home
who, under ordinary circumstances, would have
been hospitalized.
Flospital Controls and Home Care FailuresSome patients, of course, do not "succeed" on home
treatment and are admitted to the hospital. Hos¬
pitalization is usually initiated by the Institute
Treament Center staff, but only after repeated
medication changes fail to alleviate a worsening
and often acute condition. The decision to hospi¬
talize presents the most serious staff problem. The
nurses, who perceive themselves directly responsi¬
ble for both patient and family, are likely to sug¬
gest hospitalization a great deal sooner than the
staff psychiatrist. The latter is more likely to view
acute episodes as part of the recovery process and
therefore evaluates these symptoms with greater
equanimity than the nurses.
In relatively few cases, the patient or the family
institutes hospitalization proceedings without notifi¬
cation or against the advice of the Institute Treat¬
ment Center staff. Family-instigated hospitalization
usually occurs after the family's tolerance for bi¬
zarre behavior, or for the patient's chronic inca¬
pacity to perform at even a minimally acceptable
level, has been long exceeded.
Once hospitalized, all further treatment is left
to the state hospital. The patient, after hospital
discharge, does not resume participation in the
study. All such patients, however, are periodically
re-evaluated by the Institute Treatment Center
staff. This follow-up includes an interview with
the patient by the staff psychiatrist and re-testing
by the psychologist.
Since 30% of the study population is assigned
to hospital treatment to fulfill the requirements of
the study design, the follow-up of these patients
after hospital release is a crucial aspect of the
study. One month after leaving the hospital these
patients are visited by a project nurse and there
are systematic and periodic assessments by the
staff psychiatrist and psychologist to assess the
posthospital performance of the patient and to com¬
pare the functioning of these hospital control pa¬
tients with those in the drug and placebo groups.
The Patient Population—In many respects the
composition of the study population is such that
an unusually severe test of the feasibility of home
care for schizophrenics emerges. While approxi¬
mately 30% have never been hospitalized, the re¬
maining 70% have experienced from one to 30
previous hospitalizations and have spent consider¬
able time in institutions. The amount of previous
hospitalization varies a great deal—from a few
weeks or months to many years—and depends, of
course, on patient age at the time of admission to
the project.
Many of the patients are drawn from "hard core"
or multiproblem families. They tend to represent
the lowest socioeconomic stratum of the popula¬
tion and come from disorganized family settings.
The public health nurses often indicate that the
patients for whom they are responsible are fre¬
quently functioning as well or better than other
family members. These patients and their families—
economically deprived, unemployed or unemploy¬
able, and socially disorganized—present a very real
challenge for any community mental health pro¬
gram.
Of all schizophrenic patients admitted to Central
State Hospital, 90% are referred to the center; of
these, 31% meet all criteria for acceptance into the
project. The screening policies ( nonassaultive and
nonsuicidal patients), at both Central State Hos¬
pital and the Institute Treatment Center, plus the
somewhat greater family reluctance to accept male
patients, have resulted in a small preponderance
of females (63%), compared with 53% females
in the state hospital. Project patients, both male
and female, average approximately 35 years of age.
Two thirds are white; nearly 60% are married, over
a fifth have never been married, and about 19%
are divorced or separated. About two thirds have
never completed high school. In most respects,
these patients typify schizophrenic populations in
most state hospitals in the US. Patient intake into
each of the three groups—drug, placebo and hos¬
pital control—is still in process.
Success of drug group patients over placebo patients in re¬
maining at home.
100
90-
80
70
60
50-
40
30
20
10
~H DRUG GROUP PLACEBO GROUP
TOTAL UNDER 6 MONTHS 6-18 MONTHS
TIME ON PROJECT
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a Florida International University Medical Library User on 06/09/2015
Number and Percentage of Days Spent at Home and in
Hospital by Patients in Drug, Placebo, and Control Groups
Drug Placebo Control
(N=78) <N= 56) (N=50)
No. % No. % No. %
Days at home 16,309 88.2 10,535 81.7 7,910 59.8
Days in hospital 2,184 11.8 2,361 18.3 5,325 40.2
Total 18,493 100.0 12,896 100.0 13,235 100.0
Results
Drug and Placebo Patients—Of the total of 193
patients (including community agency and private
referrals ) admitted to the program in the first 18
months, 84 have been assigned to the drug group,
59 to the placebo group, and 50 to the hospital
control group. Of this total, six drug patients and
three placebo patients have either left the commu¬
nity, have refused to cooperate, or have sought
private care. Since the drug and placebo "adminis¬
trative" failures do not differ in any important
respect, these nine patients are omitted from fur¬
ther consideration in the analysis which follows.
Almost all of these patients have remained at home
after dropping out of the study.
The figure indicates that the drug patients have
been significantly more successful in remaining at
home than the placebo patients (P—0.001). Of all
drug patients, 83% have remained continuously in
the community since intake into the project. On
the other hand, 55% of all placebo patients have
succeeded in the program. The data in the figure
also suggest that the drug group increases its su¬
periority over the placebo group with time. For
example, of the drug and placebo subjects who
have been on the project for less than six months,
the percentage of successful patients in the two
groups has been 85 and 77, respectively. Of those
patients on the project from six to 18 months, 82%
of the drug subjects, but only 37% of the placebo
subjects, have remained continuously at home.
One other point deserves mention. The 13 drug
failure subjects have spent significantly more days
in the hospital than the 25 placebo failures, an
average of 168 compared with 94. This finding
attests to the efficacy of drug medication in the
sense that the 13 drug failures represent the hard
core patients for whom drug treatment, in ordi¬
narily adequate dosage, does not appear to be
enough to maintain minimal functioning. The 25
placebo patients include not only such comparably
sick patients, but also others who very likely could
have been kept home on drug medication. The
fewer days of hospitalization required by these less
severely ill patients probably accounts for the dif¬
ference in average days of hospitalization.
Home Care vs Hospital Control Patients.—In or¬
der to evaluate the effects of home care treatment
as well as the effects of hospitalization on schizo¬
phrenics, it is of interest to contrast the home care
group with the hospital controls. When this is
done, both the drug and placebo home care pa¬
tients are apparently superior to the hospital con¬
trols in terms of the percentage of time spent at
home.
Analysis of the data presented in the table re¬
veals that the drug patients have been at risk for
18,493 days since admission to the project and
have spent over 88% of this time at home. The
placebo patients, at risk 12,896 days, have spent
nearly 82% of these days at home. The hospital
control cases, at risk 13,235 days, have spent 60%
of this time in the community. This is considerably
less than either the placebo or the drug home
care patients.
Comment
Certain tentative observations may be drawn
from this experimental study. First, a program of
this type can successfully prevent the hospitaliza¬
tion of many schizophrenic patients for considera¬
ble periods of time. Only 17% of the drug patients
have required institutionalization since admission
to the program. Although this rate may be expected
to increase before the completion of the study, the
assertion in the President's message that many
presently hospitalized patients can he kept in the
community does not seem unreasonable.
Second, one of the most interesting results per¬
tains to the "public health nurse—placebo" effect.
A surprisingly large number of patients, with sup¬
port from visits by and contacts with public health
nurses, are able to manage at home even under
placebo medication. Of course, this effect decreases
very sharply with time. Still, experience in this pro¬
gram indicates that successful community mental
health care will require highly trained and deeply
committed field staff personnel who will help
"carry" patients through periodic episodes of acute
svmptoms and the problems encountered in daily
life.
Third, although patients have been maintained
successfully in the community who would normally
be hospitalized, the investigators are far from cer¬
tain that the present study program and regimen
will or should replace hospitalization for most
schizophrenic patients. We are concerned that the
mental hospital atmosphere is merely transferred
to the home. Progress reports indicate that patient
functioning is far from satisfactory in all too many
of the "successful" cases. An enriched program
consisting of homemaking services, job training, sheltered workshops, and more frequent access to
direct psychiatric services seems to be required
if the poor functioning of many "successful" pa¬
tients is to be substantially improved.
Fourth, although only 10% of the families have
refused to accept a patient back home, most are
reluctant to do so and usually prefer hospitaliza¬
tion for the patient until real improvement has
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a Florida International University Medical Library User on 06/09/2015
been achieved. It often takes a considerable amount
of explanation before a
family can be induced to
go along with the program. The major reasons for
this reluctance include:
1. Many of the families are economically de¬
prived and the patient may merely represent an
additional and, consequently, unwelcome burden.
Any home care program is likely to be jeopardized
until these economic problems are ameliorated.
2. In addition, and as previously observed, the
disorganization of many of the families poses a
real threat to any home care program. It is not
at all certain that patients would not do as well
or better living alone or in night hospital facilities.
Family counseling services might be required in
any future program which contemplates reintegrat¬
ing patients in the family setting.
3. The reluctance of families to welcome patients
home after only a few days of hospitalization and
prior to the remission of their more acute symp¬
toms is not difficult to understand. This program
would no doubt be more favorably received by
families if eligible patients were to be hospitalized
for a moderate length of time, perhaps two weeks,
before being returned home. An emergency unit
in the community for patients in acute condition
should reduce family resistance to accepting pa¬
tients back home after brief treatment.
There are many other problems associated with
this home care program. It should be noted, how¬
ever, that virtually all of the problems mentioned
with regard to home care also apply to a consider¬
able degree when patients return home after cus¬
tomary hospitalization. Despite these problems,
continued comparisons of the posthospital function¬
ing of the controls and the experimental subjects
will probably do much to reaffirm our faith in the
utility of a home care program for schizophrenic
patients.
473 W 12th Ave, Columbus, Ohio (Dr. Pasamaniek).
This study was aided by a US Public Health Service
Research Grant from the National Institute of Mental Health.
The following staff members contributed to this study:
Joseph Albini, PhD, Gene Priddy, MA, Ann Davis, MSSW,
Elizabeth Baker, RN, Raphaline Kelley, RN, Mary Raverty,
RN, Jeanette Sterchi, RN, Jan Williams, RN, Virginia Immerman, and Mary McCormick.
Sandoz, Inc., and Smith Kline and French Laboratories
supplied the drugs used in this study.
Reference
1. Kennedy, J.F.: "Mental Illness and Mental Retardation," Special Message to 88th Congress, Feb 5, 1963.
Just Words The major structures of conduit in civilization's body
industrial are wires and tubes. Both have a venerable his¬
tory. Tubes hail from reeds, wires from strings. Wires used
as conducting channels are a relatively recent innovation
—though one of greater importance than all the other jour¬
nalistically familiar revolutions (first and second industrial,
atomic, etc) put together. In the past, wires simply held things together.
The animal body operates likewise by the preferential use of wires and tubes.
The tubes include some we call pipes; very many are called vessels; but not a few
remain which we do designate as tubes. The wires in the animal body are the
nerves. The recognition that they are conducting channels is younger than the idea
that they hold things together. Nerves of the latter kind we now call tendons and
sinews. And our preoccupation with nerves as conducting channels seems as funda¬
mentally significant as the fact that industrial wires transfer electrical energy.
The word "tube" is of special interest, though its semantic history is monotonous
and its pre-Latin connections are totally obscure. Both Latin tubus and Greek syrinx
meant precisely what "tube" means (though of course it was not customary in
ancient times to make tubes of either glass or rubber or plastics). Both the Greeks
and the Romans used tubes to flute on, and hence syrinx as well as tubus was used
not infrequently to designate a musical instrument, although there were special
words available for that purpose: salpinx in Greek and tuba in Latin. The fact that
it made perfect sense to define a tuba as a kind of tubus and a salpinx as a kind of
syrinx laid the foundation for the wonderful confusion in modern English where
tubus appears as "tube," as does tuba (except when it remains "tuba"). Some of
the tubes in the animal body (the neural tube, eg) get their names from Latin tubus
and appear in French, Spanish, Italian, Portuguese, etc as tube or tubo. But others
(as the eustachian and fallopian tubes), which get their names from tuba, appear in
the romance languages as trumpets. The Greeks can be called upon to help
straighten things out. The "tubes" we also call "salpinx," though they may be
"tubes," were never meant to be called just that, "tubes." They were tubae in Latin
and rightly appear as "trumpets" in many modern languages.
Alexander Gode, PhD
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a Florida International University Medical Library User on 06/09/2015