Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry (1983) 17: 160-167
PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITAL VERSUS COMMUNITY
TREATMENT: THE RESULTS OF A RANDOMISED
TRIAL
JOHN HOULT, INGRID REYNOLDS, MANE CHARBONNEAU-POWIS,
PENELOPE WEEKES AND JENNIFER BRIGGS
One hundred and twenty patients presenting for admission were
randomly allocated into two groups. Controls received standard
hospital care and after-care. Projects were not admitted if this could
be avoided; instead they and their relatives were provided with
comprehensive community treatment and a 24-hour crisis service.
Patients with a primary diagnosis of alcohol or drug dependence,
organic brain disorder or mental retardation were excluded. During the
12 months study period, 96% of controls were admitted, 51% more
than once. Of the projects, 60% were not admitted at all and only 8%
were admitted more than once. Controls spent an average of 53.5 days
in psychiatric hospitals; projects spent an average of 8.4 days.
Community treatment did not increase the burden upon the
community, was considered to be significantly more satisfactory and
helpful by patients and their relatives, achieved a clinically superior
outcome, and cost less than standard care and after-care.
In the past 30 years, there have been major
changes in the delivery of mental health services.
All modes have been subjected to heavy criticisms,
so that Kathleen Jones giving a Maudsley Bequest
lecture in 1982 posed the dilemma of what we are
to do with the mentally ill (Jones, 1982). There is
no easy solution because whatever we do for many
of the patients, they continue to have chronic
handicaps and they and their families have needs
which are multiple and diverse. It is now clear that
to meet these needs we must provide a continuous
and comprehensive range of services.
Controlled studies in this area are few, but some
points are emerging from them to guide us. First,
although the mental hospital has become the
standard by which we judge other programs, there
has not been any evidence from controlled studies
which establishes its superiority. Secondly, there
appears to have been only one controlled study
comparing treatment in a psychiatric unit of a
general hospital with treatment in a mental
hospital (Copas et a/., 1974) where there were
almost no differences on measures of outcome.
Thirdly, there is a growing number of controlled
trials comparing community treatment programs
with hospital treatment. These studies were
critically reviewed by Braun et al. (1981) who
concluded that experimental alternatives to
hospital care of patients have led to psychiatric
outcomes not different from and occasionally
superior to those of patients in control groups.
Good outcome appeared to depend on
comprehensive and continuous programs of care
in the community. Most of the studies were
considered to have some methodological flaws.
For instance, random sampling was often not
adhered to and the very ill, the chronically ill and
those not living with relatives were excluded.
Frequently, patients only were studied; their
relatives, the community and the cost were not
Downloaded from anp.sagepub.com at University of British Columbia Library on June 27, 2015
JOHN HOULT, INGRID REYNOLDS, MARIE CHARBONNEAU-POWIS, PENELOPE WEEKES AND JENNIFER BRICCS 161
considered. Sometimes, follow-up rates were low.
Of the controlled studies, there appears to have
been only one which, as well as being adequately
designed, also provided comprehensive
community care (Stein and Test, 1978, 1980). The
results favoured community treatment. The
present study was designed to evaluate a similar
program in an Australian setting. It is the first
controlled study comparing methods of delivery
of psychiatric services in Australia.
The study had three main aims: (1) to
demonstrate that it is feasible to treat psychiatric
patients in the community, as an alternative to
mental hospital admission; (2) to show that this
can be done without detriment to patients, their
relatives, or the community; and (3) to
demonstrate that such treatment costs no more
than standard hospital care and after-care. The
effectiveness of standard hospital care and aftercare versus community treatment was compared
from the viewpoint of the patients, the viewpoint
of their relatives, the results of clinical instruments
administered to patients, and a study of treatment
costs.
Sample and Method
The sample consisted of all those who presented
voluntarily or were taken involuntarily to
Macquarie Hospital for admission over a five
months period from September 1979 to February
1980, except those with a primary diagnosis of
alcohol or drug dependence, those with organic
brain disorder or mental retardation, those under
15 or over 65 years of age, and those not resident
in the Lower North Shore or Manly-Warringah
areas of Sydney.
The Lower North Shore (pop. approx. 156,000)
and Manly-Warringah (pop. approx. 220,000) are
both areas within the Northern Metropolitan
Health Region of Sydney. Macquarie Hospital is
the only state psychiatric hospital in the region
and it tends to cater for those of lower socioeconomic status and those with the more severe
and chronic conditions. As each patient presented,
the Admission Office nurse opened a sealed
envelope in which there was a card stating either
‘project’ or ‘control’. The envelopes had been
randomly mixed, which ensured the highest
probability that the only difference between the
patient groups was the treatment given (Forbes,
1981). No patients who met the eligibility criteria
were excluded from the study, so that even the
very ill (e.g. acutely psychotic or suicidal patients)
were included. The intake period terminated when
each group contained 60 patients.
The control group received standard hospital
care and after-care. This usually consisted of
admission for an average of three weeks to one of
two 35-bed wards, built 10 years previously and
each staffed by a Unit Director (a fully qualified
psychiatrist), three to four medical officers
(trainee psychiatrists), 15 nursing staff, two social
workers, one psychologist and one occupational
therapist. The day program included large and
small group discussions, arts, crafts, work and
sporting activities. On discharge, the majority of
patients were referred to one of the six
Community Mental Health Centres in the
catchment areas for after-care.
The project group patients were not admitted if
this could be avoided; instead they were seen by
members of the project team and its psychiatrist
who took them back to the community and
immediately began treatment. For involuntary
patients not to be admitted, it was necessary for
two doctors at the Mental Hospital Admission
Office to certify that the patient did not require
admission. The project team consisted of three
psychiatric nurses, two social workers, one
occupational therapist, one psychologist and one
part-time psychiatrist, none of whom had had
previous experience with this type of work. The
treatment was both intensive and extensive and
incorporated a 24-hour crisis service. It included
medication, individual support and counselling,
training in basic living skills and social skills, as
well as family intervention, support and
education.
Evaluations were carried out at baseline and at
one, four, eight and 12 months later, by two
research psychologists who were independent of
the project team and who reported to the Division
of Health Services Research. At baseline, the
patient’s permission was obtained to interview the
closest relative (usually a parent or spouse), or if
no such relative were available, a friend who lived
with or was in close contact with the patient. This
paper is concerned with the results at the end of
the 12 months study period. At 12 months, 88%
of the project and 84% of the control patients
were interviewed and clinically assessed. The
relatives of 80% of the project and 82% of the
control patients were also interviewed at 12
months.
The questionnaires administered to the patients
were designed to measure the patients’
characteristics (e.g. demographic, socioeconomic, psychiatric history), perceptions of
current symptoms and difficulties, progress, and
satisfaction with treatment.
The questionnaires administered to the relatives
were similarly designed to measure both the
Downloaded from anp.sagepub.com at University of British Columbia Library on June 27, 2015
162 PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITAL VERSUS COMMUNITYREATMENT
objective burdens (e.g. disruptions to work, social
life, daily routine) and subjective burdens (e.g.
emotional strain or worry) that the relatives (or
significant others) experienced because of the
patients’ illness. They obtained relatives’ opinions
as to the patients’ current symptoms, difficulties,
behaviour, level of coping and progress, and
recorded the relatives’ views about and level of
satisfaction with the two forms of treatment.
Because it was considered that those relatives who
lived with and presumably were most involved
with the patients could be the most burdened, the
relatives’ data were analysed in two ways - first,
for the total sample of control and project
relatives and secondly only for those living with
the patients.
Three clinical instruments were administered.
First, the 9th Edition of the Present State
Examination as revised by Wing et a!. (1974)
which is a thoroughly developed structured mental
status interview schedule (Luria and Berry, 1980)
and which is a reliable, stringent, valid and
conservative diagnostic instrument (Wallace et al.,
1980). The other clinical instruments used were the
Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (Overall and
Gorham, 1962) and the Health Sickness Rating
Scale (Luborsky, 1962). The former gives global
ratings of the degree or severity of the patients’
symptoms and the latter, an estimate of the
patients’ total functioning.
For all patients, records were kept throughout
the study period of legal offences, utilisation of
other community and private health agencies and
especially hospital admissions. Medical records of
all Sydney state psychiatric hospitals were
regularly checked for data on admissions of any of
the project or control patients. These data were
added to the patients’ and their relatives’ reports
and were also used for costing purposes.
In the economic analyses, the cost of stays in
public and private hospitals, of treatment received
from community health centres and out-patient
clinics, of visits to private psychiatrists and of
medication were calculated for both groups of
patients. For the project group, the cost of
treatment provided by the Community Treatment
Team was also calculated. The costing study was
conducted throughout the study period by two
economists and all costing information came from
objective sources (e.g. hospital records and
accounts, community health centres and private
psychiatrists).
Results
Patient characteristics at baseline
The demographic, psychiatric and social
characteristics of the project and control patients
were not significantly different. Two-tailed chisquare tests were used throughout to test for
significant differences between the two groups.
Both groups contained many chronic patients.
Only one-quarter had not been admitted
previously to a psychiatric hospital. Two-thirds
had been admitted two or more times. Almost
one-third had previously spent one year or longer
in psychiatric hospitals. Approximately one-fifth
were employed in a full-time job, a half were
dependent on pensions or other social service
benefits. Only one-fifth were married. About twothirds were under 40 years old and just under half
were males.
Three-quarters of all the patients were
diagnosed on the Present State Examination as
suffering from one of the functional psychoses - a half specifically from schizophrenia. When
D.S.M. 111 (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual)
criteria were applied to those too ill to be assessed
on the Present State Examination, the proportion
diagnosed as psychotic (and schizophrenic) was
even higher. There were few (6070) neurotics.
Scores on the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale
showed similarly high levels of symptomatology
for project and control patients and scores on the
Health Sickness Rating Scale showed equally low
levels of overall functioning - levels attributed to
most clear-cut and overt psychoses. About 60% of
both groups had presented as involuntary
patients.
Baseline assessment of the relatives
Most relatives of both groups reported that during
the month prior to presentation, the patients had
been ‘a great’ or ‘some’ burden or worry. Half or
more of the relatives reported that the patients had
been inactive, socially withdrawn and/or
aggressive. Many felt that the patients had
disrupted their daily routine and their social life
and had caused them difficulties with their
neighbours or friends. The relatives’ descriptions
of the patients’ problems indicated that delusions,
hallucinations, thought disorder, bizarre
behaviour, strange affect and poor or strangely
distant social relationships were very common.
More than one-quarter of the patients had
threatened to commit suicide and more than onefifth had had involvement with the police in the
past month. The overall burden on both groups of
relatives was high and somewhat higher for those
6OVo of relatives who lived with the patients.
Admissions to psychiatric hospitals or clinics
during the twelve months study period
Tables 1 and 2 show highly significant (p < .001)
Downloaded from anp.sagepub.com at University of British Columbia Library on June 27, 2015
JOHN HOULT, INGRID REYNOLDS, MARIE CHARBONNEAU-POWIS, PENELOPE WEEKES AND JENNIFER BRICGS 163
differences between project and control patients in
terms of number of admissions and length of stay
TABLE 1 Number of admissions to psychiatric hospitals or
clinics during 12 months study period
Project Control
(n 53) (n 47)
None
1
2
3
4+
32 (60'70) 2 @To)
17 (32'70) 21 (45vo)
2 (4'10) 17 (36%)
1 (2%) 2 (4@?0)
1 (2'10) 5 (lllro)
TABLE 2 Length of stay in psychiatric hospitals or clinics
during 12 months study period
Project Control
(n 53) (n 47)
Not admitted
Less than 1 week
1-2 weeks
3-4 weeks
7-10 weeks
5-6 weeks
11-15 weeks
16 weeks or more
32 (6OVo)
14 (26"10)
0 (OVO)
3 (6'10)
3 (6Vo)
0 (OVO)
0 (0%)
1 (2'10)
2 (4vo)
11 (23qo)
6 (13'10)
5 (11'100)
8 (17'100)
4 (9VO)
6 (13Vo)
5 (10'10)
in psychiatric hospitals or clinics (public and
private) during the 12 months study period. With
one exception, project patients who were admitted
for one week or longer were chronic patients (i.e.
they had previously been admitted for one year or
longer). Control patients spent an average of 53.5
days in psychiatric hospitals; project patients
spent an average of 8.4 days.
Patients' feelings about treatment received
At the 12 months follow-up, the control patients
who were admitted to Macquarie Hospital were
asked how they felt about having been admitted;
the project patients who were not admitted were
asked how they felt about not having been
admitted. The project patients were significantly
(p < .001) more pleased about not having been
admitted, than were the control patients about
having been admitted (Table 3).
TABLE 3 Feelings about having been admitted (control
patients) or not having been admitted (project patients)
Very pleased and grateful
Fairly pleased and grateful
No feelings either way
Mixed feelings
Fairly upset and angry
Very upset and angry
Don't know
Not applicable
(i.e. controls not admitted
or projects admitted - to Macquarie Hospital)
Project
25 (47vo)
4 (8To)
1 (2Vo)
1 (2%)
0 (On70)
2 (4vo)
3 (6'10)
17 (32'70)
(n 53)
Control
(n 48)
11 (23Vo)
2 (4qo)
3 (6Vo)
7 (15qo)
3 (6Vo)
14 (29%)
4 (8'10)
4 (8Vo)
Control patients were asked to rate how much
they felt their admission(s) to Macquarie Hospital
had helped them and project patients were asked
to rate how much they felt the treatment from the
Community Team had helped them (Table 4). The
majority of both groups considered themselves to
have improved, but significantly (p < .01) more
project patients felt that they had been 'definitely
helped and improved greatly'.
TABLE 4 Amount of help patients received from Macquarie
Hospital or Community Team
Project Control
(n 531 (n 48)
Definitely helped and
Helped and improved
Not sure or no change
Not helped and
Definitely not helped
Don't know
Improved but not due
to Macquarie Hospital
or Community Team
Not applicable - controls
not admitted to
Macquarie Hospital
improved greatly
somewhat
somewhat worse
and much worse
29 (55%)
13 (25%)
2 (4qo)
0 (0%)
3 (6070)
2 (4070)
4 (8Vo)
-
12 (25%)
10 (21%)
5 (10%)
4 (8%)
6 (13%)
4 (8%)
3 (6%)
4 (8%)
Treatment preference was explored by asking all
patients whether they preferred admission to
Macquarie Hospital or treatment at home by a
community team. The majority of project (87%)
and control (61 Yo) patients preferred community
treatment. Those who had experienced it (i.e.
project patients), were more strongly in favour of
it; one-quarter of the control and 12'70 of the
project patients preferred admission to Macquarie
Hospital.
Responses to open-ended questions revealed
that control patients' feelings about hospital
admission were mixed. Although many felt that
they had needed admission, that hospital had
made them better and that they were well looked
after, many also felt that hospitalisation was a
negative, upsetting or unhelpful experience. The
rules and restrictions, the medication, lack of
communication and therapy and the patient mix
were particularly frequently criticised.
Project patients' responses to open-ended
questions about community treatment were
mainly positive. Most thought that the
Community Team was helpful, caring and
supportive and many indicated that they
appreciated the 24-hour availability and the
freedom that community treatment enabled them
to have. However, a few felt that they needed the
Downloaded from anp.sagepub.com at University of British Columbia Library on June 27, 2015
I64 PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITAL VERSUS COMMUNITYREATMENT
TABLE 5Patient satisfaction with various aspects of care
Project Control Sig.
(n 53) (n 48)
‘Very’ satisfied with the advice and information received
‘Very’ satisfied with the support and help received in the
‘Very’ satisfied with the amount of supervision received
Received enough treatment or care in the last 12 months 36 (68R10) 24 (5070) ns
Will ‘definitely’ or ‘probably’ need help outside of normal
working hours in the future 24 (45qo) 16 (33’10) ns
in the last 12 months 29 (55T’o) 12 (25%) p < .01
last 12 months 31 (58’70) 14 (29Vo) p < .01
in the last 12 months 27 (51’70) 5 (IOVO) p< ,001
shelter and constant supervision of the hospital.
Significantly more project patients were ‘very
satisfied’ with the advice and information (p <
.Ol), the support and help (p < .01) and the
amount of supervision (p < .001) they had
received, than were control patients (Table 5).
Finally, patients were asked how well they felt
they had been coping this year, compared to the
year before. Significantly (p < .05) more project
(72%) than control (55%) patients felt that they
had been coping better.
Clinical outcome
The Present State Examination showed, using
two-tailed t-tests, that at baseline the project and
control patients did not differ significantly on
their total P.S.E. scores or on the two sub-score
measures of psychosis - D.A.H. and B.S.O.
However, project patients did have significantly
(p < .01) lower scores on the two neurosis subscores. At 12 months, project patients had
significantly (p < .001) fewer symptoms than
control patients on the total score and on each of
the four sub-scores (Table 6). For both groups,
psychotic symptoms had greatly declined since
baseline, but non-specific neurotic symptoms were
still prevalent. At 12 months, 29Vo of the project
and 43’70 of the control patients still had sufficient
symptoms for a diagnosis of psychosis - mainly
schizophrenia and paranoid psychosis.
The Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale showed the
project and control patients to be not significantly
different on symptoms at 12 months. On the
Health Sickness Rating Scale, scores for both
groups changed from a level at baseline that was
indicative of clear-cut and overt psychosis (mean
scores of 26 for both groups), to a level at 12
months, that was considerably higher (mean score
of 50 for project patients and 46 for control
patients), but still indicative of unsatisfactory or
unstable adjustment and far from an ideal state of
functioning (i.e. a score of 100). Project patients
had significantly (p < .05) higher scores.
Relatives ’ feerings about treatment the patients
had received
The data, which will be presented in more detail at
a later date, indicated that relatives were clearly in
favour of community treatment and greatly
appreciated the continuous, readily available and
comprehensive support of the Community Team.
Although the majority of both groups of relatives
showed a preference for treatment in the
community rather than hospital admission, those
who had actually experienced it (i.e. the 48 project
relatives interviewed) were significantly (p < .01)
more strongly in favour of it than those who had
not (i.e. the 47 control relatives interviewed); 2%
of project and 35% of control relatives preferred
hospital admission to community treatment.
TABLE 6 Mean Present State Examination total and sub-scores at baseline and 12 months
Baseline Twelve months
Project Control Sig. Project Control Sig . (n 58) (n 57) (n 52) (n 46)
Mean total P.S.E. score 30.5 30.9 ns 9.8 15.4 p< .001
Mean D.A.H. (delusional and
hallucinatory syndromes) 8.2 8.4 ns 1.9 4.0 p< .001
Mean B.S.O. (behaviour, speech and
other syndromes) 7 .O 7.3 ns 2.0 3.1 p< .001
Mean S.N.R. (specific neurotic syndromes) 4.5 5.0 p< .01 1.4 2.4 p< .001
Mean N.S.N. (non-specific neurotic
svndromesl 10.5 11.6 D< .01 4.2 6 .O D< .001
Downloaded from anp.sagepub.com at University of British Columbia Library on June 27, 2015
JOHN HOULT, INGRID REYNOLDS, MARIE CHARBONNEAU-POWIS, PENELOPE WEEKES AND JENNIFER BRIGCS 165
Nearly all (90'7'0) of the project relatives,
contrasted to 46To of control relatives, felt that
the patients had received enough treatment or care
in the last 12 months (p < .001). Furthermore,
70% of the project relatives, but only 28Vo of the
control relatives (p < .001) felt that they had been
coping better during the last 12 months than the
previous year. Most relatives (85'70 of project and
72Vo of control) considered that help outside of
normal working hours would be needed in the
future and that the provision of such help could
prevent the patient from being admitted to a
psychiatric hospital.
A separate analysis of responses of those
relatives who lived with the patients (about half)
indicated that community treatment did not
increase the burden on these relatives. Indeed, the
findings indicated that the relatives who lived with
community treatment patients were even more
satisfied with community treatment and the care
received during the past 12 months than the
relatives of community treatment patients as a
whole.
None of the 28 project relatives but 41Vo of the
23 control relatives (p < .001) preferred hospital
admission to community treatment. The majority
(70Yo) of these project relatives compared to the
minority (30%) of these control relatives (p < .01)
reported that they had been coping better during
the last 12 months than the previous year. Nearly
all (89%) of the project relatives, but only 39Vo of
the control relatives (p < .001) were 'very satisfied'
with the support and help that the patients, with
whom they lived, had received during the past 12
months.
Residual problems and burden on the community
The data from all three sources (i.e. patients,
clinical instruments and relatives) indicated that at
12 months, neurotic symptoms and impaired
social functioning (e.g. anxiety, tension,
depression, social withdrawal, lethargy, inactivity
and unemployment) were still highly prevalent
among both groups of patients.
There was relatively little change in either the
project or the control patients' main sources of
income over the 12 months. The proportion for
whom work was the main source of income
increased from 22% to about 30% - an
insignificant increase. The total proportion of
those on pensions or benefits remained at a half.
Whether the patients had received community
treatment or standard hospital care and after-care
made little difference to their employment status.
Contact with the police declined significantly
for both groups over the year and the data
indicated that community treatment did not
increase this type of community burden.
However, community treatment was not as
effective in reducing the number of suicide threats
and attempts as standard care, although the
difference was not significant. For example,
during the eight months after presenting at
Macquarie Hospital, 10% of the project but none
of the control patients were reported by their
relatives as having attempted suicide. These were a
small group of chronic project patients who, prior
to and during the study period, made repeated
suicide attempts. They were now living in the
community, whereas their control group
counterparts were more likely to be in hospital.
However, none of the project, but two of the
control patients, died during the 12 months study
period - one from a stroke and the other by
drowning (possibly suicide).
The costing study
During the 12 months study period, the average
treatment cost (public and private; direct and
indirect) for each project patient was $4,489 and
for each control patient $5,669. That is, standard
hospital care and after-care cost 26Vo more than
community treatment. For project patients, 81 '70
of the treatment costs were incurred in the
community, mainly the cost of the Community
Treatment Team. Only 7% of the treatment costs
of control patients were incurred in the
community. Cost of treatment in Macquarie
Hospital accounted for 79Vo of all treatment costs
incurred by the control patients.
Discussion
The findings of the present carefully controlled
study showed that the majority of psychiatric
patients suffering from mainly functional
psychotic disorders can be treated more effectively
(i.e. better clinical outcome and higher patient
satisfaction) and more economically outside a
psychiatric hospital. The study also suggested that
this mode of treatment was greatly appreciated by
most relatives and helped them to cope better.
Indeed, the positive effects were more pronounced
on the relatives than the patients. The very
positive results of this study and those of a similar
study carried out in the U.S.A. (Stein and Test,
1980) reflected the large amount of support given
to the patients and their relatives. The main
components of this were (1) the 24-hour
availability; (2) crisis intervention; (3) the
continuity of care; (4) the assertive and directive
approach (e.g. going out to the patient and their
relatives); (5) the teaching of living skills to
Downloaded from anp.sagepub.com at University of British Columbia Library on June 27, 2015
166 PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITAL VERSUS COMMUNITY TREATMENT
patients and (6) the support to, education of and
teaching of coping skills to relatives.
Psychiatric hospitals offer intensive care,
shelter and asylum to patients during acute
episodes - but early discharge policies mean that
the relatives are not relieved of the burden for as
long. Standard after-care leaves the initiative to
the patients and their relatives.
Irrespective of the mode of treatment, most
patients were found to have chronic or residual
impairments, even though their psychotic
symptoms had been alleviated. The literature (e.g.
Lamb, 1979; Lazare, 1979; Stein and Test, 1978),
indicates that long term impairments are common
consequences of the psychoses, especially
schizophrenia, and that effective forms of
treatment have not yet been found for these. This
means that care must be continuous, long term
and able to respond quickly. Investigators have all
reached the same conclusion: after community
care stops, the beneficial effects of such care
diminish (Fenton et al., 1979). However, most
patients require less intensive care over time (Stein
and Test, 1980), although there will be some
chronic patients who will not improve
significantly and who will continue to need a great
deal of care over time.
Acutely psychotic and disorganised patients
who lacked familial support sometimes needed a
few days admission to settle down. Chronic
patients who were determined to be admitted
achieved this briefly. The most difficult patients
were a few chronic schizophrenics who became
acutely psychotic and disorganised for weeks.
While it did not occur in this group, experience
elsewhere indicates that there is a small number of
other patients who may need asylum or
hospitalisation. These include patients suffering
from severe psychotic depression, patients who
are actively suicidal or homicidal, who cannot be
dissuaded from such action, and patients who
need acute psycho-organic assessment. Although
these are the minority of patients, there will
always be a need for some form of care which
offers them refuge and asylum. However, the use
of psychiatric hospitals could be greatly reduced if
community treatment were fully implemented.
In practice, the reduction in hospital use may
not be as great as in the present study, because the
project team may have been particularly zealous.
Nevertheless, the cost savings will be great if
whole or substantial parts of hospitals are closed
rather than bed reductions spread over different
hospitals. This rationalisation could occur without
loss of employment to those staff currently
employed in psychiatric hospitals. No members of
the Community Treatment Team had previous
experience in this type of work - nor were they
especially skilled or experienced. Probably most
staff currently working within hospitals could also
cope with working as members of a community
team. They would of course need to be willing to
work in this way, be receptive to some re-training
and be prepared to work on a roster. In practice, it
was found that there was little work for the on-call
staff member between 11.00 p.m. and 8.00 a.m.
All project staff preferred this to their previous,
conventional style of working, but they did like
regular rosters, worked out well in advance.
However, if community treatment is opted for
purely because it is the ‘cheaper’ mode of
treatment and attention is not paid to the quality
of community treatment, then the consequences
will be negative rather than positive. Overseas
evidence (Braun et al., 1981) clearly indicates that
if community treatment is not comprehensive,
outcome is not good and patients, their relatives
and the community suffer. If properly
implemented, community treatment can be
expected to lead to positive and profound familial,
social, political and economic consequences
(Braun et al., 1981).
Acknowledgements
This study was jointly funded by the Health
Commission of New South Wales and the
Commonwealth Department of Health, from
whom a Research and Development Grant was
received. It would not have been possible without
the support and co-operation of Dr J. Lawson,
Regional Director and Dr E. Cullen, Community
Health Advisor, Northern Metropolitan Region;
Dr J. Thompson, Medical Superintendent,
Macquarie Hospital; and Mr J. Martins, Director,
Division of Health Services Research, Health
Commission of New South Wales. The economic
study was carried out by Yona Cass and Helen
Lapsley. Details of this and of the study as a whole
are available from the first author. Mr P. DuncanJones, of the Social Psychiatry Research Unit,
Canberra, is thanked for carrying out the Catego
Analysis of the Present State Examination.
Special thanks are due to the staff of the
Community Team who worked so effectively in
what was to them, a new mode of treatment. The
continuing support of Dr Alan Rosen is greatly
appreciated.
Refertoea
BRAUN, P., KOCHANSKY. G., SHAPIRO. R., GREENBERG. S.. GUDEMAN.
I. E., JOHNSON, S. and SHORE, M. F. (1981) Overview:
deinstitutionalization of prjychiatric patients, a critical review of outcome
studies. Americun Journul of Psychialry, 136. 736-749.
Downloaded from anp.sagepub.com at University of British Columbia Library on June 27, 2015
JOHN HOULT, INGRID REYNOLDS, MARIE CHARBONNEAU-POWIS, PENELOPE WEEKES AND JENNIFER BRIGGS 167
COPAS, 1. B., FRYER, M. and ROBIN, A. (1974) Treatment Settings in
Psychiatry: A Comparative Study. Henry Kimpton, London.
FENTON, F. R., TESSIER. L. and STRUENING, E. L. (1979) A comparative
trial of home and hospital psychiatric care: one year follow-up, Archives of
General Psychiatry, 36, 1073-1079.
FORBES, I. F. (1981) Clinical trials symposium: highlights in development of
randomized clinical trials. Medics/ Journal of Australia, 1, 159-160.
JONES, K. (1982) Scull's dilemma. British Journal oJPsychiatry, 141, 221-226.
LAMB, H. R. (1979) The new asylums in the community. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 36, 129-134.
LAZARE. A. (ed.) (1979) Outpatient Psychiatry: Diagnosis and Treatment.
Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore.
LUBORSKY, L. (I%2) Clinican's judgements of mental health. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 7.407-417.
LURIA, R. E. and BERRY, R. (1980) Teaching the Present State Examination in
America. American Journal of Psychiatry, 37, 26-31.
OVERALL, J. E. and GORHAM. D. L. (1962) The Brief Psychiatric Rating
Scale. Psychological Reports, 10, 799-812.
STEIN, L. 1. and TEST, M. A. (1978) An alternative to mental hospital
treatment. In Alternatives to Mental Hospital Treatment (eds. L. 1. Stein and
M. A. Test). Plenum, New York.
STEIN, L. I. and TEST, M. A. (1980) Alternative to mental hospital treatment:
I. Conceptual model, treatment program and clinical evaluation. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 37, 392-397.
WALLACE, C. J.. NELSON, C. J., LIBERMAN, R. P., AITCHISON. R. A,.
LUKOFF, D.. ELDER, J. P. and FERRIS, C. (1980) A review and critique of
social skills training with schizophrenic patients. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 6,
42-63.
WING, J. K., COOPER, J. E. and SARTORIUS, N. (1974) Measurement and
Classification of Psychiatric Symptoms: An Instruction Manualfor P.S. E. and
Cafego Program. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
JOHN HOULT, M.B., B.s., D.P.M., M.R.A.N.Z.C.P.
Psychiatrist,
Chatswood Community Health Centre,
51 Hercules Street,
Chatswood, N.S.W. 2067.
Senior Research Psychologist,
Division of Health Services Research,
Health Commission of New South Wales.
Research Psychologist,
Community Treatment Project.
Research Psychologist,
Community Treatment Project.
Psychologist,
Community Treatment Project.
INGRID REYNOLDS, B.A.(Hons.)
MARIE CHARBO"EAU-POWIS, M.Psychol.
PENELOPE WEEKES, B.A.(Hons.)
JENNIFER BRIGGS, B.A.(Hons.)
SPECIALIST (PSYCHIATRY)
$35,257 - $47,977
The Department of Veterans' Affairs is seeking applications from suitably qualified men and women for a
vacancy of Specialist (Psychiatry) at Brisbane's Repatriation General Hospital, Greenslopes.
Greenslopes is a general hospital accommodating 417 patients including 357 acute beds and 60
rehabilitation beds. The Psychiatric Unit of the hospital comprises 31 beds, has a Registrar-in-Training and
two Resident Medical Officers. The Unit also has access to approximately 100 beds at the State Psychiatric
Unit's Wacol Pavilion. A consultancy service is also provided for Kenmore Repatriation Hospital (66 beds).
Twelve Psychiatric Outpatient clinics are conducted each week and there are six visiting psychiatrists.
Total attendance at the Outpatient Clinic in 1982 was 2771.
The successful applicant will be responsible to the Senior Specialist-in-Charge for the performance of
normal specialist duties and will assist in the coordination and control of the speciality.
Applicants must be qualified for admission to registration as a medical practitioner in Australia and
possess appropriate postgraduate qualifications. Applicants must also be eligible for registration as a
Specialist in the State of Queensland.
Salary is within the range of $35,257 - $47,977 per annum. There is also a right of limited private practice.
The successful applicant will be permanently appointed to the Australian Public Service. Conditions of
service include up to five weeks annual recreation leave with bonus payment, cumulative paid sick leave,
three months long service leave after ten years continuous service and a contributory superannuation
scheme. Fares to take up duty for the appointee and family may be paid and some assistance may also be
given towards removal expenses. A short-term accommodation allowance may also be payable in some
circumstances.
Further information may be obtained from Dr. Bryan Todd, Director (Medical Services), telephone
(07) 225 2203 during office hours.
Applications including full curriculum vitae and the names and addresses of two professional referees
should be forwarded two weeks after publication to:
The Medical Superintendent
Repatriation General Hospital
Newdegate Street
GREENSLOPES, QLD. 4120
Downloaded from anp.sagepub.com at University of British Columbia Library on June 27, 2015