Patient self-testing is a reliable and acceptable alternative to
laboratory INR monitoring
It is likely that approximately 950 000 people in the UK
currently receive oral anticoagulant therapy (OAT), with this
number estimated to increase at approximately 10% /year
(Rose, 1996). Warfarin is the most widely used oral anticoagulant in the UK and has a half-life of 36–42 h. The increased
usage of warfarin is largely related to implementation of longterm anticoagulation in an ageing population for atrial
fibrillation (Petersen et al, 1989). Newer indications include
primary prevention of ischaemic heart disease (MacCallum
et al, 2000) and long-term prevention of recurrent venous
thromboembolism (Ridker et al, 2003). Consequently, several
models of patient care, involving various degrees of decentralization, have been suggested to manage the increased
workload arising from the increased demand. One solution is
patient self-testing (PST), i.e. the measurement of the
prothrombin time (PT) expressed as an international normalized ratio (INR) by the patients themselves using capillary
blood samples on small point of care (POC) coagulation
monitors. Such monitors need to be accurate over the full
therapeutic range of the INR, between 2Æ0–4Æ5, and require an
acceptable independent evaluation (Fitzmaurice & Machin,
2001). A number of studies have proved comparability
between POC testing and conventional laboratory techniques
based on POC testing by healthcare professionals (Bachour
et al, 2001; Vacas et al, 2001; Havrda et al, 2002; Shiach et al,
2002; Loebstein et al, 2003; Jackson et al, 2004), whereas
Chris Gardiner,1 Karen Williams,1
Ian J. Mackie,2 Samuel J. Machin2
and Hannah Cohen1
1
Department of Haematology, University College
London Hospitals NHS Trust, London, and
2
Department of Haematology, University College
London, London, UK
Received 27 July 2004; accepted for publication
25 October 2004
Correspondence: Mr C. Gardiner, Department
of Haematology, University College London
Hospitals NHS Trust, 4th Floor, 60 Whitfield
Street, London W1T 4EU, UK.
E-mail: c_gardiner@btconnect.com
Summary
An ageing population and the continuing expansion of clinical indications
for coumadin therapy have increased pressure on hospital anticoagulant
clinics. One solution is patient self-testing (PST) of the international
normalized ratio (INR) using capillary blood samples on point-of-care
coagulation monitors at home. We conducted a prospective study to
determine whether patients can achieve accurate INR values through PST,
using the CoaguChek S (Roche Diagnostics, Lewes, UK). The main outcome
measurements were: comparability of INR values obtained by PST and the
hospital laboratory, patient acceptability as assessed by a questionnaire and
anticoagulant control. Eighty-four patients [53 men, 31 women; median age
59 years (range 26–83)], receiving long-term oral anticoagulation (warfarin),
were recruited from our Anticoagulation Clinic. Patients were randomized to
weekly self-testing or continuing 4-weekly hospital laboratory monitoring of
INR. Comparison of INRs (n ¼ 234) showed no significant differences
between the CoaguChek (median INR 3Æ02) and laboratory testing (median
INR 3Æ07). There was excellent correlation between the two methods
(r ¼ 0Æ95), with 85% of CoaguChek results within 0Æ5 INR units of the
laboratory method. On four occasions, differences of >1 unit INR were
obtained, but in each case the patient’s anticoagulation was unstable (INR
>4Æ5 by both methods) and the differences in INR would not have altered
patient management. 87% of patients found self-testing straightforward, 87%
were confident in the result they obtained and 77% preferred self-testing. We
conclude that PST is a reliable alternative to hospital clinic attendance and is
acceptable to the majority of suitably trained patients.
Keywords: anticoagulation, international normalized ratio.
research paper
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2141.2004.05300.x ª 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, British Journal of Haematology, 128, 242–247
others have questioned the reliability of POC test INR results
(Poller et al, 2003; Vacas et al, 2003). Of note, INR results
obtained by technically skilled healthcare professionals using
POC testing devices have been reported to be more reliable
than those achieved by non-technical trained individuals
(Delaney et al, 1999). There is a paucity of data on the
comparison of INR results obtained by PST with laboratory
INRs. White et al (1989) reported, in a study on 26 patients
and based on results during the first 8 weeks of OAT,
comparison of INRs obtained by self-testing using a Coumatrack monitor (Du Pont, Wilmington, DE, USA) with those
from hospital laboratories. However, comparisons between
PST INR and laboratory INR were not performed on the same
sample, limiting conclusions from this study. There are no
published evaluation studies on the reliability of PST within
the setting of a routine anticoagulant clinic in the UK.
We report data from a prospective trial, commissioned by
the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
(MHRA) and approved by the British Committee for Standards in Haematology (BCSH) Haemostasis and Thrombosis
Task Force, to investigate the accuracy and acceptability of PST
in a trained and motivated group of patients.
Patients and methods
Ethical approval was granted by the Joint University College
London (UCL)/UCL Hospital (UCLH) Committees on the
Ethics of Human Research and patients gave informed
consent. Eighty-four patients were recruited from the UCLH
Haematology Department Anticoagulant Clinic between September 2002 and April 2003.
Eligibility
All patients over the age of 18 years, attending the clinic, who
had received long-term oral anticoagulation for at least
8 months and with a previous record of good compliance,
were identified. Approximately 800 patients were contacted by
letter; 84 of these volunteered for the study and, following
written consent, were prospectively randomly allocated to the
intervention (PST) or control group (continuing with laboratory testing with no specific education or training).
Protocol
Self-testing patients were trained by a single nurse practitioner
in the use of a POC coagulometer (CoaguChek S; Roche
Diagnostics) (Sawicki, 1999). Patients attended two training
sessions at least 1 week apart, which covered theoretical aspects
of oral anticoagulation and POC INR monitoring. Following a
satisfactory assessment of their ability to self-test, they
proceeded to the trial (Murray et al, 2004). These patients
tested themselves at home once a week and recorded the result
for a 6-month period. The results obtained by self-testing were
not used for management of anticoagulation during the study.
Anticoagulant control was based on a laboratory test performed every 4 weeks. Self-test and laboratory INR tests used
for comparability studies were collected within 1 h of each
other. The control group simply attended the anticoagulant
clinic every 4 weeks or more frequently, if clinically indicated.
The purpose of the control group was to control for possible
biases because of selection and the effect of increased patient
training. Dosage adjustments were performed for both groups
of patients by the anticoagulant clinic staff using the laboratory
INR and computer-assisted dosing (Dawn Clinical Software,
Milnthorpe, Cumbria, UK). The PST group performed internal quality control (QC) tests (CoaguChek PT Control; Roche
Diagnostics) every week and an external quality assessment
using a lyophilized plasma preparation provided by the UK
National External Quality Assessment Scheme (UK NEQAS),
once during the study (Murray et al, 2003). Patients in the selftesting group were asked to complete a patient acceptability
questionnaire after 3–4 months. The questionnaire sought
individual patient’s views on six aspects of using the CoaguChek S: ease of use, frequency of repeated tests, difficulty of
getting an adequate sample, ease of the use of QC materials,
confidence in the result and preference for home testing versus
hospital testing.
Prothrombin time/INR measurement
Venous blood was collected into one-tenth volume 0Æ105 mol/
l citrate (Vacutainer; Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ,
USA) using 19 or 21 gauge needles and minimal stasis and
plasma was obtained by centrifugation at 2000 g for 10 min.
To measure the INR, a recombinant human thromboplastin
reagent (Innovin; Dade Behring, Marburg, Germany) was used
on a CA-1500 coagulometer (Sysmex, Kobe, Japan). The
geometric mean was determined using blood from 20 healthy
normal volunteers and the thromboplastin-specific international sensitivity index provided by the manufacturer was
verified using frozen INR verification plasmas (Precision
Biologic, Dartmouth, Canada).
Assessment of anticoagulant control. The different testing
frequencies used for PST, laboratory control and laboratory
results in the previous 6 months made direct comparison of
the time spent in the therapeutic range difficult, but this
remained an important issue. Routine clinical practice
recommends the use of a target INR-value rather than a
target range (Haemostasis and Thrombosis Task Force of the
BCSH, 1998). For the purposes of this exercise, the target
INR Œ0Æ5 INR units was used as an acceptable therapeutic
range. Time in range was determined using the time in range
calculator software (4S Dawn Clinical Software) using the
method of Rosendaal et al (1993).
Statistics. Statistical analysis was performed using analyse-itTM
software (Analyse-It Software, Leeds, UK). Mean INR values
were compared using a paired t-test, with statistical
Patient Self-testing of INR
ª 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, British Journal of Haematology, 128, 242–247 243
significance defined as P < 0Æ05. For the regression analysis,
outliers were rejected where they were outside the 95%
confidence interval. Bland and Altman plots were used to
illustrate the degree of agreement or divergence between the
two methods, as the numerical value increased. Fisher’s exact
test was used to test the significance of the difference between
the observed time in therapeutic range between patient groups.
Results
Eighty-four patients were randomized to the study; 44 to the
self-testing group and 40 to the control group. Patient
demographics, target INR values and indications for anticoagulation were similar for both groups (Table I), although it
was notable that the median age of the control and self-testing
groups (58Æ4 and 57Æ9 years, respectively) was lower than that
of the anticoagulant clinic population as a whole (65Æ7 years).
Four patients experienced difficulty performing self-testing
and did not proceed onto the study following training. One
further patient, randomized to the self-testing group, did not
attend training. Therefore, of the 44 patients randomized to
the self-testing group, 39 commenced self-testing, whereas all
patients randomized to the control group entered the study.
Nine self-testing patients and one from the control group
failed to complete the study (Table II). There were no
significant differences between self-testing and laboratory
INRs (234 paired measurements in 31 self-testing patients),
(Table III). Excellent correlation was obtained between the
methods (r ¼ 0Æ95; Fig 1) and no trend was observed with
increasing INR-value (Fig 2). Overall, 85% of the results was
within 0Æ5 INR units of each other. On four occasions,
differences of >1 unit INR were obtained, but in each case the
INR was above the desired therapeutic range (INR >4Æ5 by
both methods) and the differences in INR would not have
altered patient management.
No significant difference between percentage time in therapeutic range in the self-testing and control groups was
observed using Fisher’s exact test (Table IV), irrespective of
whether the laboratory or CoaguChek methods were studied.
Ten minor bleeding/bruising events were reported, with five
from each group. Overanticoagulation was thought to be a
contributory factor in five of these events (three in the selftesting group and two in the control group).
Questionnaires were returned by all 31 patients who were
still self-testing after 3 months (one of these failed to complete
the study, because of the moving from the area). Majority of
the patients (84%) initially found it difficult to obtain an
adequate sample, but most of them subsequently found selftesting very easy (55%) or quite easy (32%). Only one patient
found the CoaguChek S difficult to use, but most patients
found that they occasionally had to repeat tests and some still
experienced difficulty in obtaining an adequate sample (16%).
Most patients (87%) were confident in the result that they
obtained and, of those who expressed a preference, most
(77%) preferred self-testing rather than attending the hospital
anticoagulant clinic. None of the patients experienced difficulty using the internal QC procedure. The self-testing patients
who completed the study were conscientious in performing
and recording their weekly tests, with compliance of >98%. On
Table I. Patient characteristics.
Self testing group Control Group
Male 29 24
Female 15 16
Mean age (years) 57Æ9 58Æ4
Age range (years) 26–83 31–75
Indications for anticoagulation
Atrial fibrillation 11 12
Replacement heart valve 16 9
Venous thromboembolism 10 14
Cardiovascular prophylaxis 5 3
Cerebrovascular prophylaxis 2 2
Target ranges
2Æ0–3Æ0 26 19
3Æ0–4Æ0 9 11
1Æ5–2Æ0 10
1Æ5–2Æ5 01
2Æ0–2Æ5 02
2Æ5–3Æ5 74
3Æ0–3Æ5 13
Table II. Reasons for patients not completing the study.
Reason for withdrawal Self-test group Control group
Poor compliance* 2 1
Serious illness (pretraining) 1 NA
Failed to attend training 1 NA
Visual problems 1 NA
Unable to obtain sample 1 NA
Poor dexterity 4 NA
Warfarin discontinued 1 0
Moved to another area 2 0
Patient died 1 0
Total withdrawals 14 1
NA, not applicable.
*The patients failed to attend the clinic and/or self-test on a regular
basis.
Table III. Self-testing international normalized ratio (INR) versus
laboratory INR (n ¼ 234).
CoaguChek INR Laboratory INR
Mean 3Æ02 3Æ07
Standard deviation (SD) 0Æ99 0Æ95
Minimum 1Æ20 1Æ25
Maximum 6Æ90 6Æ86
Self-testing INR versus laboratory INR: paired t-test results were nonsignificant.
C. Gardiner et al
244 ª 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, British Journal of Haematology, 128, 242–247
the few occasions where weekly tests were not performed, this
was generally the result of the patient experiencing difficulty
with self-testing or disruption of their anticoagulant control
because of hospitalization (two cases) or on one occasion, the
loss of the CoaguChek S monitor.
Although 96Æ5% of internal QC results were within the
manufacturer’s stated range (2Æ2–4Æ7), this range was felt to be
too wide and a poor level of imprecision was observed
[percentage coefficient of variance (CV) ¼ 15Æ9%]. During the
course of the study, one instrument defect and one test-strip
problem were encountered. On each occasion, both the
patient’s sample and the QC gave unexpected abnormal results
and the problem, once identified, was easily corrected.
However, on other occasions, abnormal QC values were
obtained despite the patient’s own result demonstrating
adequate control of anticoagulation. No instrument or teststrip defects were demonstrated on these occasions. The
NEQAS samples produced a narrower range of results
(percentage CV 7Æ4% and 6Æ6% for two separate exercises).
Discussion
We have showed that suitably trained patients can obtain their
INR by PST using the CoaguChek S, currently the most widely
used handheld PT/INR monitor in the UK. The PST results
showed excellent correlation with routine hospital laboratory
monitoring of OAT (r ¼ 0Æ93), with 85% of results within 0Æ5
INR units of each other. On the four occasions where
differences of >1 unit INR were obtained, the INR was above
the desired therapeutic range (INR >4Æ5 by both methods) and
would not have altered patient management. The INR system
is known to be unreliable above 4Æ5, limiting comparisons
between different methods above this level (WHO Expert
Committee on Biological Standardisation, 1983). Neither
significant differences in anticoagulant control were observed
between the self-testing and control groups during the study,
nor between results obtained in individual patients during the
study period and the previous 6 months. This is in contrast
with the findings of White et al (1989) who reported that an
improvement in OAT could be achieved through PST alone.
Another study evaluated the accuracy of home testing, but
on a paediatric population (n ¼ 23) with home testing
performed by parents of children receiving OAT (Massicotte
et al, 1995) using the Biotrack monitor (Ciba Corning
Diagnostics, Medfield, MA, USA). In a recent study of patients
receiving phenprocoumon (half-life 140 h) in the Netherlands,
a comparison of PST with patient self-management versus
specialized anticoagulant clinic management showed comparable levels of OAT control, as judged by mean time in range in
Fig 2. Bland and Altman diagram showing agreement between
duplicate international normalized ratio (INR) results in self-testing
patients.
Fig 1. Self-testing international normalized ratio (INR) versus laboratory INR in self-testing patients. Four statistical outliers are shown.
Table IV. Percentage time in range: self-testing group versus control.
Self-testing group
Control
group
(laboratory INR)
CoaguChek
INR
Laboratory
INR
Mean 61 66 64
Standard deviation
(SD)
20 22 26
Minimum 24 23 7
Maximum 96 100 100
Fisher’s exact test: control versus self-testing groups (laboratory testing), results were non-significant.
Control versus self-testing groups (CoaguChek; Roche Diagnostics),
results were non-significant.
Patient Self-testing of INR
ª 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, British Journal of Haematology, 128, 242–247 245
therapeutic range (Gadisseur et al, 2003). However, paired PST
and laboratory INR results were not directly compared.
Although the number of patients who failed to complete the
study was higher in the self-testing group than the control
group (nine versus one), most patients found self-testing using
the CoaguChek S straightforward and felt confident with the
result they obtained (87%) and also expressed a preference for
self-testing over attendance at the hospital anticoagulation
clinic (77%).
It was generally felt that weekly QC testing was not costeffective, as the manufacturer’s stated range was too wide and
poor level of imprecision was obtained. Furthermore, most
out-of-range QC results were because of problems with the use
and preparation of the QC reagent, rather than instrument/
test-strip faults. Monthly testing, as recommended by the
BCSH recommendations (Fitzmaurice & Machin, 2001), may
be more appropriate with additional testing performed in the
event of an unexpected INR result, following possible monitor
damage and on starting a new box of test strips. As the NEQAS
samples produced a narrower range of results, they were
generally perceived to be of more value than the internal QC.
Occasional paired PST and laboratory testing or comparison
with a regularly quality controlled instrument in clinic may be
a useful alternative for ensuring adequate quality assurance.
The present study only assessed one particular POC INR
monitor. However, as patient demand for self-testing/selfmanagement becomes more widespread, monitoring devices
from other manufacturers should become more widely available. Test strips for POC INR monitors may now be prescribed
on the Drug Tariff, subject to appropriate European Economic
Community licensing (i.e. CE marking). However, it is
recommended that before such instruments are introduced
into clinical practice, they should have a satisfactory independent evaluation. The patient training on the use of such
devices needs to follow nationally agreed guidelines and
recommendations (Near Patient Testing Working Party.
General Haematology Task Force of BCSH. Thrombosis and
Haemostasis Task Force of BCSH, 1995; Fitzmaurice &
Machin, 2001). The cost-effectiveness of self-testing has not
yet been formally studied in the UK. In addition to instrument
and test-strip costs, any economic assessment must include
elements, such as transport, for the patient and clinic
overheads, the potential for improved anticoagulant control
with the reduced risk of thromboembolic or haemorrhagic
complications, greater patient freedom and reduction in lost
patient working time. The overall uptake for this trial was
approximately 10% only. Some patients were apprehensive
about entering a clinical trial, while others felt that allocation
to the control group offered no advantages but required more
frequent visits to clinic, but the low uptake suggests that the
routine clinical utilization of such a self-testing programme
may be limited to a minority of motivated patients receiving
long-term oral anticoagulation.
We conclude that PST using the CoaguChek S offers a
reliable alternative to laboratory determination of INR and is
acceptable to the majority of suitably trained patients who
previously attended a specialist anticoagulation clinic. Overall,
these results are reassuring and should encourage implementation of a validated self-testing approach using a CoaguChek S
system. This will potentially enable patients to progress to selfmanage their own oral anticoagulant control using an agreed
dosing algorithm. It is important that all self-testing patients
remain registered with a clinician/nurse practitioner responsible for their oral anticoagulation regime in accordance with
BCSH guidance (Fitzmaurice & Machin, 2001). Future MHRA
studies will assess the efficacy of a patient self-management
programme.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful for the funding from the Medicines
and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency and an unrestricted educational grant from Roche Diagnostics.
Competing interests: none.
References
Bachour, R., Gardiner, C., Mackie, I.J. & Machin, S.J. (2001) Medical
Devices Agency Evaluation of the Roche CoaguChek S coagulometer.
MDA 01026, HMSO, Norwich, UK.
Delaney, B.C., Hyde, C.J., McManus, R.J., Wilson, S., Fitzmaurice,
D.A., Jowett, S., Tobias, R., Thorpe, G.H. & Hobbs, F.D. (1999)
Systematic review of near patient test evaluations in primary care.
British Medical Journal, 319, 824–827.
Fitzmaurice, D.A. & Machin, S.J. (2001) British Society for Haematology Task force for Haemostasis and Thrombosis. Recommendations for patients undertaking self-management of oral
anticoagulation. British Medical Journal, 323, 985–989.
Gadisseur, A.P., Breukink-Engbers, W.G., van der Meer, F.J., van den
Besselaar, A.M., Sturk, A. & Rosendaal, F.R. (2003) Comparison of
the quality of oral anticoagulant therapy through patient self-management and management by specialized anticoagulation clinics in
the Netherlands: a randomized clinical trial. Archives of Internal
Medicine, 163, 2639–2646.
Haemostasis and Thrombosis Task Force of the BCSH (1998)
Guidelines on oral anticoagulation: third edition. British Journal of
Haematology, 101, 374–387.
Havrda, D.E., Hawk, T.L. & Marvin, C.M. (2002) Accuracy and precision of the CoaguChek S versus laboratory INRs in a clinic. Annals
of Pharmacotherapy, 36, 769–775.
Jackson, S.L., Bereznicki, L.R., Peterson, G.M., Marsden, K.A., Jupe,
D.M., Tegg, E., Vial, J.H. & Kimber, R.I. (2004) Accuracy,
reproducibility and clinical utility of the CoaguChek S portable
international normalized ratio monitor in an outpatient anticoagulation clinic. Clinical and Laboratory Haematology, 26,
49–55.
Loebstein, R., Kurnik, D., Lubetsky, A., Ezra, D. & Halkin, H. (2003)
Potential dosing errors using portable prothrombin time monitoring
devices. Blood Coagulation and Fibrinolysis, 14, 479–483.
MacCallum, P.K., Brennan, P.J. & Meade, T.W. (2000) Minimum
effective intensity of oral anticoagulant therapy in primary prevention of coronary heart disease. Archives of Internal Medicine, 160,
2462–2468.
C. Gardiner et al
246 ª 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, British Journal of Haematology, 128, 242–247
Massicotte, P., Marzinotto, V., Vegh, P., Adams, M. & Andrew, M.
(1995) Home monitoring of warfarin therapy in children with a
whole blood prothrombin time monitor. Journal of Pediatrics, 12,
389–394.
Murray, E.T., Kitchen, D.P., Kitchen, S., Jennings, I., Woods, T.A.,
Preston, F.E. & Fitzmaurice, D. (2003) Patient self-management of
oral anticoagulation and external quality assessment procedures.
British Journal of Haematology, 122, 825–828.
Murray, E., Fitzmaurice, D., McCahon, D., Fuller, C. & Sandhur, H.
(2004) Training for patients in a randomised controlled trial of self
management of warfarin treatment. British Medical Journal, 328,
437–438.
Near Patient Testing Working Party. General Haematology Task Force
of BCSH. Thrombosis and Haemostasis Task Force of BCSH (1995)
Guidelines for near patient testing: haematology. Clinical and
Laboratory Haematology, 17, 301–310.
Petersen, P., Boysen, G., Godtfredsen, J., Andersen, E.D. & Andersen,
B. (1989) Placebo-controlled, randomised trial of warfarin and aspirin for prevention of thromboembolic complications in chronic
atrial fibrillation. The Copenhagen AFASAK study. The Lancet, 1,
175–179.
Poller, L., Keown, M., Chauhan, N., van den Besselaar, A.M., Tripodi,
A., Shiach, C. & Jespersen, J. (2003) Reliability of international
normalised ratios from two point of care test systems: comparison
with conventional methods. British Medical Journal, 27, 30–32.
Ridker, P.M., Goldhaber, S.Z., Danielson, E., Rosenberg, Y., Eby, C.S.,
Deitcher, S.R., Cushman, M., Moll, S., Kessler, C.M., Elliott, C.G.,
Paulson, R., Wong, T., Bauer, K.A., Schwartz, B.A., Miletich, J.P.,
Bounameaux, H., Glynn, R.J. & PREVENT Investigators (2003)
Long-term, low-intensity warfarin therapy for the prevention of
recurrent venous thromboembolism. The New England Journal of
Medicine, 348, 1425–1434.
Rose, P. (1996) Audit of anticoagulant therapy. Journal of Clinical
Pathology, 49, 5–9.
Rosendaal, F.R., Cannegieter, S.C., van der Meer, F.J. & Briet, E. (1993)
A method to determine the optimal intensity of oral anticoagulant
therapy. Thrombosis and Haemostasis, 69, 236–239.
Sawicki, P.T. (1999) A structured teaching and self-management
program for patients receiving oral anticoagulation: a randomized
controlled trial. Working Group for the Study of Patient SelfManagement of Oral Anticoagulation. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 281, 145–150.
Shiach, C.R., Campbell, B., Poller, L., Keown, M. & Chauhan, N.
(2002) Reliability of point-of-care prothrombin time testing in a
community clinic: a randomized crossover comparison with hospital laboratory testing. British Journal of Haematology, 119, 370–
375.
Vacas, M., Fernandez, M.A., Martinez-Brotons, F., Lafuente, P.J.,
Ripoll, F., Alvarez, C. & Iriarte, J.A. (2001) Comparative study of a
portable prothrombin time monitor employing three different
systems in oral anticoagulant units. Haemostasis, 31, 18–25.
Vacas, M., Lafuente, P.J., Unanue, I., Santos, M. & Iriarte, J.A. (2003)
Therapeutic concordance of two portable monitors and two routine
automatic oral anticoagulant monitoring systems using as reference
the manual prothrombin time technique. Hematology Journal, 4,
214–217.
White, R.H., McCurdy, S.A., von Marensdorff, H., Woodruff, Jr, D.E.
& Leftgoff, L. (1989) Home prothrombin time monitoring after the
initiation of warfarin therapy. A randomised, prospective study.
Annals of Internal Medicine, 111, 730–737.
WHO Expert Committee on Biological Standardisation (1983)
Requirements for thromboplastins and plasma used to control anticoagulant therapy. WHO Technical Report Series. 1993, Report 33. pp.
81–105. WHO, Geneva.
Patient Self-testing of INR
ª 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, British Journal of Haematology, 128, 242–247 247