ORIGINAL ARTICLE
A randomised controlled trial of patient self management
of oral anticoagulation treatment compared with primary
care management
D A Fitzmaurice, E T Murray, K M Gee, T F Allan,FDR Hobbs
.............................................................................................................................
J Clin Pathol 2002;55:845–849
Background: The increase in numbers of patients receiving warfarin treatment has led to the development of alternative models of service delivery for oral anticoagulant monitoring. Patient self management for oral anticoagulation is a model new to the UK. This randomised trial was the first to compare
routine primary care management of oral anticoagulation with patient self management.
Aim: To test whether patient self management is as safe, in terms of clinical effectiveness, as primary
care management within the UK, as assessed by therapeutic international normalised ratio (INR) control.
Method: Patients receiving warfarin from six general practices who satisfied study entry criteria were
eligible to enter the study. Eligible patients were randomised to either intervention (patient self management) or control (routine primary care management) for six months. The intervention comprised two
training sessions of one to two hours duration. Patients were allowed to undertake patient self management on successful completion of training. INR testing was undertaken using a Coaguchek device and
regular internal/external quality control tests were performed. Patients were advised to perform INR
tests every two weeks, or weekly if a dose adjustment was made. Dosage adjustment was undertaken
using a simple dosing algorithm.
Results: Seventy eight of 206 (38%) patients were eligible for inclusion and, of these, 35 (45%)
declined involvement or withdrew from the study. Altogether, 23 intervention and 26 control patients
entered the study. There were no significant differences in INR control (per cent time in range: intervention, 74%; control, 77%). There were no serious adverse events in the intervention group, with one fatal
retroperitoneal haemorrhage in the control group. Costs of patient self management were significantly
greater than for routine care (£90 v £425/patient/year).
Conclusion: These are the first UK data to demonstrate that patient self management is as safe as primary care management for a selected population. Further studies are needed to elucidate whether this
model of care is suitable for a larger population.
T
he expansion of clinical indications for warfarin,1 2
particularly stroke prevention in non-rheumatic atrial
fibrillation,3 4 has heightened concerns over where and
how warfarin monitoring should be undertaken.5 6 This is an
important policy issue for all healthcare systems because current data show that only one third of patients with identified
atrial fibrillation over the age of 65 are currently receiving
anticoagulation.7
Current models of oral anticoagulation management within
the UK include the traditional hospital outpatient model and
various forms of community management, all of which
require patient attendance at a clinic of some sort. We have
previously demonstrated the efficacy of primary care oral
anticoagulation management using near patient testing to
estimate international normalised ratio (INR) and computerised decision support software for dosage supervision within a
practice nurse led clinic (the Birmingham model).8
“Studies from Europe and the USA have suggested that
patient self management can improve therapeutic control
compared with routine testing”
An alternative model of care involves patients measuring
their own INR using near patient testing equipment and
interpreting the result themselves, in a similar way to diabetic
patients monitoring their own glucose control. This model is
widespread in Germany and is known as patient self
management.9 Although convenience and patient autonomy
are undoubtedly an important feature of this model, the relative clinical effectiveness of patient self management must be
established before recommendations can be made regarding
its wider implementation. Reliable portable machines are
available, which have been subjected to rigorous laboratory
evaluation.10–12 Studies from Europe and the USA have
suggested that patient self management can improve therapeutic control compared with routine testing.13–19 However, the
routine care comparitor within these studies often represents
suboptimal performance.20 Furthermore, the cost implications
of patient self management for the UK National Health Service system are not directly equivalent to the costs for private
health insurance schemes in other countries.
We report the first data from a randomised controlled trial
to investigate the efficacy of patient self management
compared with optimal routine management within the
UK.21 Outcome measures included INR control in terms of the
percentage of time spent within the therapeutic range and the
proportion of tests within the therapeutic range, serious
adverse events, and costs. Our study also investigated the criteria for the selection of patients for patient self management,
.............................................................
Abbreviations: CRF, clinical report form; EQA, external quality
assurance; INR, international normalised ratio; IQC, internal quality
control
See end of article for
authors’ affiliations
.......................
Correspondence to:
Dr D A Fitzmaurice,
Department of Primary
Care and General Practice,
Medical School, University
of Birmingham, Edgbaston,
Birmingham B15 2TT, UK;
D.A.Fitzmaurice@bham.ac.uk
Accepted for publication
13 June 2002
.......................
845
www.jclinpath.com
 on October 6, 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright. http://jcp.bmj.com/ J Clin Pathol: first published as 10.1136/jcp.55.11.845 on 1 November 2002. Downloaded from 
patient attitude towards patient self management, and quality
of life issues.
METHODS
Six general practices in the West Midlands using the Birmingham model of anticoagulation management were recruited for
our study. Before the original near patient testing and computerised decision support software trial, those practices had not
been involved in anticoagulation monitoring and were typical
of service practice. Clinics were nurse led and used a
Coaguchek near patient testing device (Roche Diagnostics
Lewes, Sussex, UK) for INR measurement and computerised
decision support software (BAP-PC; University of Birmingham) for the interpretation of the results.
All patients attending the clinic, over the age of 18, receiving
long term anticoagulation treatment for a period of at least six
months, with sufficient vision and manual dexterity to
operate a Coaguchek near patient testing system, and with
satisfactory INR control, defined as achieving INR within 0.5
of the target value for at least 60% of the time in the previous
12 months, were identified. From this list, the practice nurse
was asked to select patients who would be capable of
performing patient self management, following the criteria of
previous treatment adherence, physical well being, anxiety,
cognitive ability, visual acuity, and ability to follow simple
instructions. These selected patients were invited to an informal talk about the study and asked to give written consent.
Patients who consented to participate in the study were
randomly allocated using computer generated coding into
either intervention (patient self management) or control
(routine clinic management).
Intervention group (patient self management)
Those in the self management group of patients were required
to attend a training course involving two workshops of one to
two hours, one week apart. Workshops, based within
individual practices, were organised by research staff and
attended by practice staff. Sessions covered theoretical and
practical aspects of anticoagulation management, including
the procedure for performing a blood test using the near
patient testing device, quality control procedures, and managing the INR result using a specified algorithm (fig 1).
After the first training session, patients were given a near
patient testing device and test strips to practice blood tests at
home. They were asked to record at least six results and highlight any problems. At the second session they were given a
series of clinical vignettes to assess their understanding of INR
management. Patients were individually assessed by the
research team and if it was felt that they were competent to
carry out self management, sufficient test strips and quality
control vials were provided for home use.
For a six month period, patients were required to perform
an INR test every two weeks or after one week following dosage adjustment. Batch numbers and expiry dates of test strips
and quality control vials distributed to patients were recorded
centrally. Daytime access to medical advice was provided via a
pager and patients were instructed that the dosing algorithm
could be overridden only after consultation with the research
team. Support was also available from their practice nurse and
general practitioner, and a record kept describing all contacts
made by the patients. Self management patients were
provided with a clinical report form (CRF) to record INR
results, warfarin dose, adverse events, advice received, and
number of test strips used.
Internal quality control (IQC) was provided by the
manufacturer and performed at week 1, week 8, and week 20
of the study. Patients were also asked to perform IQC if they
recorded an unusual INR result or when using a new batch of
test strips. External quality control (EQC) was performed four
times during the study period, twice at home without
supervision (weeks 10 and 20) and twice at the practice with
supervision by research personnel (weeks 12 and 22). EQC
was provided by the National External Quality Assessment
Scheme in the form of lyophilised plasma samples and
diluents. Two separate lyophilised samples were used and one
sample was tested on three occasions. Patients performed EQC
tests on the Coaguchek provided, and were given a performance grading based on the consensus result from other users
of the same near patient testing device. This included all sites
nationally, either within or remote from a laboratory setting.
Control group
Control patients were managed as before in routine practice
clinics using the Coaguchek near patient testing device for
INR measurement. Practice nurses entered data on INR, warfarin dose, number of test strips used, and any adverse events
on to the CRF at each visit.
Collection of patients’ responses to self management
At study conclusion, a random sample of patients (eight
patient self management and eight control) were given a
semistructured interview covering relevant themes generated
from a series of focus groups, which involved professionals
involved in anticoagulation management. Material was pooled
to elicit questions relevant to their experience in the
study—for example, the training, alternative methods of care,
attitudes to self management, and self efficacy. Questions
from a previously validated questionnaire22 regarding warfarin
treatment were also used, in addition to the SEIQoL tool for
quality of life estimation.23 Interviews were audiotaped and
transcribed. Content analysis of the questionnaires was used
to draw out common themes and valid comment.
Figure 1 Patient algorithm.
846 Fitzmaurice, Murray, Gee, et al
www.jclinpath.com
 on October 6, 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright. http://jcp.bmj.com/ J Clin Pathol: first published as 10.1136/jcp.55.11.845 on 1 November 2002. Downloaded from 
Data analysis
Data were collated on to an SPSS database for analysis.
Townsend scores of home addresses were compared. Individual statistical tests included McNemar’s test for dependent
proportions, χ2
, and log linear modelling.
Cost data were collected over the six month follow up period
on a per patient basis, allowing the estimation of health service costs for each study patient. The data focused on key
resource use items where variation by trial arm was
hypothesised a priori. These items, along with the unit costs
used in this analysis, are listed in table 1. The mean cost each
year for each group (control versus intervention) was
compared using standard parametric methods (t test), given
that the cost distributions were not highly skewed.
RESULTS
Two hundred and six of a total of 298 (70%) patients attending the anticoagulation clinics at six study practices fulfilled
preliminary requirements for study entry. One hundred and
twenty eight of 206 (62%) were considered inappropriate for
patient self management by practice nurses, and 22 of 78
(28%) of the remaining patients refused to enter the study.
Reasons for exclusion included; problems with manual
dexterity (13%), anxiety (12%), lack of cognitive ability (8%),
non-compliance (6%), physically unwell (8%), or too elderly
for patient self management (12%). Fifty six of 206 (27%)
patients entered the study (26 controls, 30 patient self
management). Seven patients randomised to patient self
management were not included for analysis: three did not
attend the training sessions, one failed the assessment, and
three dropped out within the first month of the study (two
because of a loss of confidence and one because of problems
with manual dexterity). Therefore, 23 patients randomised to
the patient self management group were included in the trial
analysis.
There were no significant differences in mean age (patient
self management, 63 years; controls, 69 years) or Townsend
scores between the two groups. A larger proportion of men
than women took part in the study (37 men, 12 women).
Twenty one of the 23 participants were white and 17 of 23
were retired.
Clinical indications for warfarin treatment were similar
between the two groups, with most patients receiving warfarin for atrial fibrillation (27 of 49).
INR control and adverse events
There was no significant difference in prestudy (six months)
INR percentage time in range (66% patient self management
versus 76% controls). There were no significant differences
between the two groups in the percentage time in range (74%
patient self management versus 77% controls) or the
proportion of tests in range (66% patient self management
versus 72% controls) for the study period (table 2), and no
significant change between prestudy and study data for either
group.
There were seven self reported minor adverse events (two
breathlessness, two unexplained bruising, one haematuria,
and one menorrhagia) and no serious events in the intervention group. There was one serious adverse event in the control
group, a fatal retroperitoneal haemorrhage. There were no
recorded minor adverse events in the control group. Control
patient data were abstracted from clinical records, whereas
intervention patients were asked directly at follow up regarding adverse events. The need for telephone support was minimal.
External quality assurance
The EQA results from the study participants were compared
with the results from 75 health care professionals using the
Coaguchek near patient testing device. There were no significant differences in median INRs between the patients and the
professionals (table 3).
Frequency of testing and costs
In the six months before the study, there was no significant
difference between groups in mean number of tests performed
for each patient(6.1 patient self management versus 5.9 controls). The patient self management group showed a
significant increase in the mean number of tests for each
patient during the study (14.6 patient self management versus
5.3 controls; p < 0.001), giving a mean frequency of testing of
1.6 weeks for the patient self management group and five
Table 1 Resource items and unit costs
Resource item Unit cost (£) Source
Control group
Follow up attendance at anticoagulation clinic 8.84 Parry et al24
Intervention group
Test strip (for each strip) 2.30 Manufacturer
Advice by practice nurse (for each 15 minute consultation) 5.75 Netten25
Internal quality control (for each assessment) 2.30 Manufacturer
External quality control (for each assessment) 30.00 NEQAS
Training session (for each patient)*
Room hire 6.00 Parry et al24
Staff time 20.00 Parry et al24
Test strips 23.00 Manufacturer
Quality control 1.46 Manufacturer
Equipment (per machine) 400.00r Manufacturer
*Assuming 5 patients for each training session.
NEQAS, National External Quality Assessment Scheme.
Table 2 International normalised ratio results
Percentage time in
range (95% CI)
Percentage of tests
in range (95% CI)
Self management (n=23) 74 (67–81) 66 (61–71)
Control (n=26) 77 (67–86) 72 (65–80)
CI, confidence interval.
Table 3 National External Quality Assessment
Scheme results
Sample 1
Median INRs
Sample 2
Median INRs
Patients (n=23) 3.6, 3.8, 3.7 2.9
Professionals (n=75) 3.4 2.8
INR, international normalised ratio.
Patient self management of oral anticoagulation treatment 847
www.jclinpath.com
 on October 6, 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright. http://jcp.bmj.com/ J Clin Pathol: first published as 10.1136/jcp.55.11.845 on 1 November 2002. Downloaded from 
weeks for the control group. Sixty one of 336 (18%) of INR
tests performed by the patients in the self management group
during the study period were outside protocol criteria. The
reasons given for extra tests were: concurrent antibiotic treatment, tooth extraction, and working abroad.
The mean cost each year for patients in the intervention
arm was £425 compared with £90 for patients in the control
arm (p < 0.001). Intervention costs were based on capital
costs (spread over five years at a rate on interest of 6%) and
running costs of the equipment, quality control, training, and
support from the practice. Control costs were based on average
cost for each patient attending a primary care clinic. These
costs included capital costs of equipment, training of the general practitioner and practice nurse (spread over five years at a
rate on interest of 6%), running costs to include time spent by
practice nurse in running the clinic, general practitioner support, test strips, and service charge for room usage (table 4).
Indirect costs to the patient were not included.
Interviews and questionnaires
Five common themes emerged from the patient self management interviews: knowledge and management of condition
and self empowerment, increased anxiety and obsession with
health, self efficacy, relationship with health professionals,
and societal and economic cost. No significant difference in
quality of life was found between the two groups.
DISCUSSION
This study aimed to evaluate the clinical effectiveness of
patient self management compared with a routine primary
care clinic. Patient self management involved near patient
testing technology (Coaguchek), which has been shown to be
safe in previous studies.14 17 19 26 Patients managed the near
patient testing device with minimal support following the
training, and coped with both IQC and EQA procedures.
No difference in INR control or serious adverse events was
found between the two groups, demonstrating that selected
UK patients are capable of measuring their own INR and dosing their warfarin accordingly. These are important data
because a criticism of previous studies is that the standard
care comparitor was suboptimal,26–28 whereas INR percentage
time in range data for routine care are demonstrably better in
our study than previously reported data (77% versus 50%,
respectively).14 29
Only 38% of patients receiving warfarin were considered
suitable for patient self management and nearly one third
(28%) of these refused to participate. Furthermore, because
about a quarter of those patients randomised to patient self
management withdrew from the study overall, just under half
of those considered eligible for patient self management consented and completed the study. Therefore, these excellent
INR results may reflect that only motivated, compliant, and
long term treatment patients were recruited.
Although poor treatment adherence has been cited as a
major cause of unstable anticoagulation with warfarin,30
patient self management has been shown to have a positive
influence in the control of diabetes,31 32 and hypertension.33
Therefore, it is possible that instead of aiming patient self
management primarily at motivated patients, a package of
training, self management, and support may be the solution to
encourage motivation in less dedicated patients. The results of
our study interviews agreed with previous ones in that poor
adherence can be improved with patient self management. For
most patients, the reduction in professional support was seen
as a positive aspect of their care, as long as support was available. Further studies are needed to elucidate definitions for
selection, perhaps based more on patient self selection and the
identification of inappropriate patients after training and
assessment.
Training was based on the German nationally approved
programme for anticoagulation29 and other centres have
described similar training of varying intensity.20
The patient self management group in our study performed
INR tests almost three times more frequently than the
routinely managed group in demonstrating equivalent therapeutic control. The two weekly testing conducted within our
study was based on previous studies.29 At present, there are no
formal guidelines relating to the frequency of testing for optimum management and it is an area that also requires further
investigation.
“For most patients, the reduction in professional support
was seen as a positive aspect of their care, as long as
support was available”
The high cost for patients in the intervention arm is a function of the number of tests undertaken and the consumable
and equipment costs of self management tests. If this
technology becomes more more widely available and its associated costs fall over time then the costs for patient self management could become more favourable. Test strips are now
available on prescription, which would enable more patients to
undertake patient self management, although there are obvious cost implications for the National Health Service.
However, on current evidence, a more conventional approach
to the management of patients receiving anticoagulation is by
far the cheapest option.
For our study, patients successfully performed EQA on four
separate occasions and these results will contribute to the
debate concerning patients’ ability to manage EQA.34 IQC is
considered by some to be an adequate performance test for the
reliability of the result, but although it is a useful test to assess
day to day precision it could be argued that the target range is
unacceptably wide. In addition, if EQA is deemed essential for
hospital and primary care clinics undertaking INR measurement, the same conditions must apply to patient self management, although this has not been referred to in previous
patient self management studies.
In conclusion, patient self management is in an embryonic
phase in the UK, and these are the first data to suggest that it
is as clinically effective as routine care, in this case primary
care management of oral anticoagulation. Evidently patient
self management is more costly than practice based management as a result of increased use of the near patient testing
device, test strips, quality assurance, and training. Some of
these excess costs may not prove necessary. Nevertheless, if
patient self management costs are confirmed as higher than
routine care they could only be recouped within the National
Health Service by reductions in serious adverse events,
particularly stroke. Given that routine care in the UK is
already good this outcome is unlikely.
Before consideration can be given to widespread adoption
of this model further UK research is needed. This will need to
deal with issues around the nature of training, the definition
of patient eligibility, the frequency of testing, and costs.
Although cost effectiveness appears unlikely considering
these preliminary data, patient self management has been
Table 4 Total cost for each patient calculated for
each year
Intervention group Control group
Number 23 26
Mean 425.23* 89.71*
SD 52.65 38.58
Median 413.53 88.40
Interquartile range 388.23–459.53 53.04–123.76
Range 342.23–563.03 17.68–141.44
*p<0.001, t test.
848 Fitzmaurice, Murray, Gee, et al
www.jclinpath.com
 on October 6, 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright. http://jcp.bmj.com/ J Clin Pathol: first published as 10.1136/jcp.55.11.845 on 1 November 2002. Downloaded from 
shown to be safe and effective for the minority of patients who
might select it.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
S Bryan, (Health Services Management Centre, The University of Birmingham) for health economic input. S Kitchen (National External
Quality Assessment Scheme, Sheffield) for supplying and analysing
EQA results. This study was part funded by a unrestricted research
grant from Roche Diagnostics UK. The funders took no part in the
study conception, design, analysis, or interpretation. DF is funded by
an NHS career scientist award.
.....................
Authors’ affiliations
D A Fitzmaurice, E T Murray, K M Gee, T F Allan, F D R Hobbs,
Department of Primary Care and General Practice, Medical School,
University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK
REFERENCES
1 Lowe GDO. Anti-thrombotic treatment and atrial fibrillation. BMJ
1992;305;1445–6.
2 Sweeney KG, Pereira-Gray D, Steele R, et al. Use of warfarin in
non-rheumatic atrial fibrillation: a commentary from general practice. Br J
Gen Pract 1995;45:153–8.
3 Gustafson C, Asplund K, Britton M, et al. Cost effectiveness of primary
prevention in atrial fibrillation: Swedish national perspective. BMJ
1992;305:1457–60.
4 Sandercock P, et al. Atrial fibrillation and stroke: prevalence in different
types of stroke and influence on early and long term prognosis
(Oxfordshire community stroke project). BMJ 1992;305:1460–5.
5 Taylor F, Ramsey M, Voke J, et al. GPs not prepared for monitoring
anticoagulation. BMJ 1993;307:1493.
6 Sudlow CM, Rodgers H, Kenny RA, et al. Service provision and use of
anticoagulants in atrial fibrillation. BMJ 1995;311:558–61.
7 Sudlow M, Rodgers H, Kenny RA, et al. Population based study of use of
anticoagulants among patients with atrial fibrillation in the community.
BMJ 1997;314:1529–30.
8 Fitzmaurice DA, Hobbs FDR, Murray ET. Primary care anticoagulant
clinic management using computerized decision support and near patient
international normalized ratio (INR) testing: routine data from a practice
nurse-led clinic. Fam Pract 1998;15:144–6.
9 Taborski UWE, Wittstamm FJ, Bernado A. Cost-effectiveness of
self-management anticoagulant therapy in Germany. Semin Thromb
Haemost 1999;25:103–7.
10 Kapiotis S, Quehenburger P, Speiser W. Evaluation of the new method
Coaguchek for the determination of the prothrombin time from capillary
blood: comparison with Thrombotest on KC-1. Thromb Res
1995;77:563–7.
11 Oberhardt BJ, Dermott SC, Taylor M, et al. Dry reagent technology for
rapid convenient measurement of blood coagulation and fibrinolysis. Clin
Chem 1991;37:520–6.
12 Machin SJ, Mackie IJ, Chitolie A, et al. Near patient testing (NPT) in
haemostasis a synoptic review. Clin Lab Haematol 1996;18:69–74.
13 White R, McCurdy SA, von Marensdorff H, et al. Home prothrombin
time monitoring after the initiation of Warfarin therapy. Ann Intern Med
1989;111:730–6.
14 Hasenkam JM, Kimose HH, Knudsen L, et al. Self-management of oral
anticoagulation therapy after heart valve replacement. Eur J Cardiothorac
Surg 1997;11:935–42.
15 Ansell JE, Patel N, Ostrovsky D, et al. Long term patient
self-management of oral anticoagulation. Arch Intern Med
1995;155:2185–9.
16 Anderson DR, Harrison L, Hirsh J. Evaluation of a portable prothrombin
time monitor for home use by patients who require long-term oral
anticoagulant therapy. Arch Intern Med 1993;153:1441–7.
17 Barnado A. Experience with patient self-management of oral
anticoagulation. J Thrombosis Thrombolysis 1995;2:321–5.
18 Massicotte P, Marzinotto V, Vegh P, et al. Home monitoring of warfarin
therapy in children with a whole blood monitor. J Pediatr
1995;127:389–94.
19 Korfer R, Kortke H. ESCAT early self controlled anticoagulation trial. Ann
Thorac Surg [In press.]
20 Chiquette E, Amato MG, Bussey HI. Comparison of an anticoagulation
clinic with usual medical care: anticoagulation control, patient outcomes,
and health care costs. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:1641–7.
21 Fitzmaurice DA, Hobbs FDR, Murray ET, et al. Oral anticoagulation
management in primary care with the use of computerized decision
support and near-patient testing. Randomized, controlled trial. Arch Intern
Med 2000;160:2343–8.
22 Lancaster TR, Singer DE, Sheehan MA, et al. The impact of long-term
warfarin therapy on quality of life: evidence from a randomised trial.
Arch Intern Med 1991;151:1944–9.
23 O’Boyle CA, McGee HM, Hickey A, et al. The schedule for the
evaluation of individual quality of life (SEIQoL): administration manual.
Dublin: Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 1993.
24 Parry D, Fitzmaurice D, Raftery J. Anticoagulation management in
primary care: a trial based economic evaluation. Br J Haematol
2000;111:530–3.
25 Netten A, Dennett J. Unit costs of health and social care. Canterbury:
University of Kent, Personal Social Services Research Unit, 1996.
26 Fitzmaurice DA, Hobbs FDR, Murray ET, et al. Evaluation of
computerised decision support for oral anticoagulation management
based in primary care. Br J Gen Pract 1996;46:533–5.
27 Baglin T. Decentralised anticoagulation care. Clin Lab Haematol
1994;16:327–9.
28 Rose P. Audit of anticoagulation therapy. J Clin Pathol 1996;49:5–9
29 Sawicki PT. A structured teaching and self-management program for
patients receiving oral anticoagulation. A randomised controlled trial.
JAMA 1999;281:145–50.
30 Kumar S, Haigh JRM, Rhodes LE, et al. Poor compliance is a major
factor in unstable outpatient control of anticoagulant therapy. Thromb
Haemost 1989;62:729–32.
31 Sonksen PH, Judd SL, Lowy C. Home monitoring of blood-glucose
method for improving diabetic control. Lancet 1978;i :729–32.
32 Walford S, Gale EAM, Allison SP, et al. Self monitoring of blood
glucose. Lancet 1978;i:732–5.
33 Sawicki PT, Muhlhauser I, Didjurgeit U, et al. Intensified antihypertensive
therapy is associated with improved survival in type 1 diabetic patients
with nephropathy. J Hypertens 1995;13:933–8.
34 Kitchen S, Fitzmaurice D, Murray E, et al. Patient self-determined INRs:
are they under control? Br J Haemol 2000;108(suppl 1):48.
Take home messages
• There were no significant differences in the international
normalised ratio control between the self management
patients and the control group and there were no serious
adverse events in the self management group
• Thus, patient self management was as safe as primary care
management for this selected population
• However, the costs were significantly higher in the self
managemnt group (£90 v £425/patient/year)
• Further studies are needed to elucidate whether this model
of care is suitable for a larger population
Patient self management of oral anticoagulation treatment 849
www.jclinpath.com
 on October 6, 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright. http://jcp.bmj.com/ J Clin Pathol: first published as 10.1136/jcp.55.11.845 on 1 November 2002. Downloaded from 