Self-Managed Anticoagulation: Results From a
Two-Year Prospective Randomized Trial With Heart
Valve Patients
Pushpinder Sidhu, FRCSI, and Hugh O. O’Kane, FRCS
Department of Cardiac Surgery, Royal Hospitals Trust, Belfast, Northern Ireland
Background. This study was conducted to assess the
ability of patients receiving heart valve replacements to
practice self-managed anticoagulation using a portable
coagulometer.
Methods. We carried out a prospective, randomized
trial, comparing self-managed anticoagulation with conventional management. Patients practicing self-managed
anticoagulation (51 patients) did so at home, measuring
their international normalized ratio and then deciding on
their dosage of warfarin, while conventionally controlled
patients (n  49) attended hospital clinics or were managed by their family physicians.
Results. We successfully trained 41 of 44 patients who
agreed to self-manage their anticoagulant therapy; 34 of
the 41 managed their own anticoagulation at home for 2
years. Their control, assessed by a number of tests in
range (67.6% versus 58.0%) and time in therapeutic range
(76.5% versus 63.8%), was significantly better than that
for the group managed conventionally (p < 0.0001). There
was no significant difference in mortality or morbidity
between the two groups.
Conclusions. Self-managed anticoagulation is a reliable, easily learned method of controlling anticoagulation, and it is suitable for approximately two thirds of
patients, with excellent results.
(Ann Thorac Surg 2001;72:1523–7)
© 2001 by The Society of Thoracic Surgeons
Anticoagulant-related complications after heart valve
replacement are major contributors to mortality
and morbidity [1]. Determination of the prothrombin
time expressed as the international normalized ratio
(INR) using a laboratory coagulometer and a standardized thromboplastin is currently the gold standard
method for anticoagulation monitoring. Many approaches to improving control of anticoagulation have
been tried with some success, including computerassisted dosing [2], more frequent testing [3], management by specialist clinics [4], and management by general practitioners [5, 6].
More recently, easy to use portable coagulometers that
perform an INR on a single drop of capillary blood have
become available. Early experience with self-managed
anticoagulation (SMA) indicates that selected patients
can control their own anticoagulation using such a portable coagulometer as the Coaguchek (Roche Diagnostics, Lewes, UK) with excellent results [7–9].
Our aim with this study was to conduct a prospective,
randomized controlled trial to assess the ability of our
patients to control their anticoagulation with the
Coaguchek.
Material and Methods
The Coaguchek is a portable coagulometer that uses a
test strip containing a reaction chamber coated with iron
oxide particles and thromboplastin derived from rabbit
brain. A drop of capillary blood (10 to 25 L) obtained
from a finger prick is applied to the strip, which is in an
electromagnetic field. As the blood clots, the iron oxide
particles, previously agitated by the electromagnetic
field, stop moving, and this lack of movement is detected
by reflectance photometry. Each box of test strips is
supplied with a coded chip providing calibration data for
the coagulometer. The manufacturer provides a liquid
quality control.
Patients
We enrolled the first 100 patients who consented to enter
the study from those who had previously had heart valve
operations between 1994 and 1997 by one surgeon
(H.O’K.) and were on life-long anticoagulation therapy
with warfarin (231 patients). Exclusion criteria were kept
to a minimum, ie, all patients older than 85 years were
excluded, as were those with visual difficulties. These 100
patients were then randomized using a simple random
number generator program to allocate the 100 patients
into two groups:
Group 1 consisted of 51 patients (mean age, 61.0 years;
range, 32 to 85 years). The male:female ratio was 27:24.
They had 35 aortic valve replacements, 15 mitral valve
replacements, and one double valve replacement. All
prosthetic valves were St. Jude Medical except 1 patient
Accepted for publication June 22, 2001.
Address reprint requests to Mr O’Kane, Department of Cardiac Surgery,
Royal Hospitals Trust, Grosvenor Rd, Belfast BT12 6BA, Northern Ireland;
e-mail: hugh@doctors.org.uk.
© 2001 by The Society of Thoracic Surgeons 0003-4975/01/$20.00
Published by Elsevier Science Inc PII S0003-4975(01)03049-1
who had a repair of a paraprosthetic leak of a Bjork Shiley
mitral prosthesis and 1 patient who previously had an
Edwards Duromedics mitral valve and returned for an
aortic valve replacement. These patients were offered
training in SMA, and those who accepted were trained in
two 3-hour sessions. Training group size varied from 2 to
5 patients, and during training patients were given basic
facts about blood clotting, how to recognize the side
effects of over- and under-anticoagulation, and how
drugs, diet, alcohol, and infection may alter coagulation.
They were also supervised through 10 international normalized ratio (INR) determinations using the Coaguchek,
and also through a quality control test. Patients received
basic education about hand hygiene while performing
tests, to reduce risk of infection. Theoretical knowledge
was assessed using a simple examination of 10 questions
requiring one- or two-word answers. Successful patients
were asked to perform INR testing once a week. They
were encouraged to perform more frequent INR measurements if they were commenced on new medication,
consumed more than usual amounts of alcohol, had
unstable INRs, or had an infection. The therapeutic range
for their INR was 2.0 to 3.0, with aortic valve replacements advised to stay between 2.0 and 2.5 and mitral
valve replacements and double valve replacements 2.5
and 3.0. They adjusted their anticoagulant dosage according to a simple protocol (Table 1). Patients were also
taught the importance of seeking medical advice if their
INR was too high ( 4.0) or too low ( 1.5) and also if
they had any bleeding or thromboembolic events. A
doctor from our unit was available to answer calls from
patients. Routine review by a physician was not
arranged.
Group 2 consisted of 49 patients (mean age, 60.8 years;
range, 26 to 81 years). Male:female ratio was 19:30. They
had 24 aortic valve replacements, 22 mitral valve replacements, and 3 double valve replacements. These patients
were left with their usual anticoagulant management by
their family physician, or at a hospital anticoagulant
clinic. Although we did not control the therapeutic range,
we recommended the same ranges for all patients on
discharge.
Ethical approval for this study was obtained from the
local hospital ethics committee. We obtained informed
consent from all patients.
Data Collection
Group 1 patients (SMA) recorded the results of their INR
measurements in a standard book issued by the Health
Authority. These were then mailed to us at 3- to 4-month
intervals as requested, and the data reviewed by one of
us (P.S.). General practitioners and anticoagulation clinics used the same books for group 2 patients, and these
were collected at similar intervals and reviewed by one
author (P.S.). In addition, data on morbidity (ie, hemorrhage or thromboembolic phenomena) as defined by the
guidelines of The Society of Thoracic Surgeons [10] was
collected by postal questionnaire. We ensured complete
follow-up by telephone contact with each patient and by
contacting the patient’s general practitioner if required.
Autopsy records were obtained in relevant cases.
Statistical Analysis
An IBM PC-compatible desktop computer was used for
data analysis. We used the Statistica software package
(StatSoft Inc, 1998; STATISTICA for Windows, Tulsa, OK).
For group comparisons, we used Fisher’s exact test for
small sample numbers and the 2 test for larger groups.
To calculate time in therapeutic range for each group, we
used the method described by Rosendaal and associates
[11]. This method, assuming a linear relationship between two consecutive INR values, calculates the time in
days at various INR values in-between and thus is an
estimate of the time in therapeutic range.
Results
Of the 51 patients who were randomized to group 1 (SMA
group), 7 patients declined training. The reasons stated
were distance from training center (n  4), lack of
confidence in ability to manage warfarin dosing (n  2),
and lack of confidence in ability to perform finger-prick
sampling of blood (n  1).
The remaining patients (n  44) attended all the
required training sessions. Of these patients, 3 were
considered unsuitable for SMA as they either had difficulty with blood sampling or with managing their own
warfarin dosing. Thus, 41 (80%) of the original 51 patients
commenced SMA. Three of these patients initially required the help of a caregiver (in all cases a relative), but
later managed independently.
In group 1, at the end of 3 months, 6 of the 41 patients
had abandoned SMA in favor of conventional management: 3 had difficulty obtaining blood samples, 2 preferred general practitioner management, and 1 had technical problems with the instrument. Of the remaining 35
patients (69%), 1 patient successfully practiced SMA for a
year and then returned to her general practitioner when
she had difficulty obtaining strips from us. The other 34
patients continued to practice SMA for 2 years. This
yields a total follow-up of 67 patient-years. During this
period, they have performed 3,136 tests, of which 67.6%
were in the therapeutic range (INR, 2.0 to 3.0). Mean INR
for the group was 2.5.
In group 2, follow-up was obtained for 48 of the 49
Table 1. Protocol Used by Patients to Adjust Dose of
Warfarina
INR Value Obtained Action Taken by Patient
 1.5 Contact doctor for advice
1.5–1.9 Increase dose of warfarin by 1 mg daily
2.0–2.5 Same dose of warfarin
2.6–4.0 Decrease dose of warfarin by 1 mg daily
 4.0 Contact doctor for advice
a If the patient fluctuated between ranges very often, the dose increment
was changed to 0.5 mg daily rather than 1 mg.
INR  international normalized ratio.
1524 SIDHU AND O’KANE Ann Thorac Surg
SELF-MANAGED ANTICOAGULATION 2001;72:1523–7
patients for the period of the trial. One patient, a 70-yearold woman (mitral valve replacement previously), died
within the first 3 months of the trial; no INR data were
available for this period. The other 48 patients had 1,060
tests performed during the trial period, of which 58%
were in the therapeutic range (p  0.0001 when compared
with group 1). The total follow-up period was 85.1 patient-years. Mean INR over the period was 2.6. The
distribution of the number of tests versus INR for groups
1 and 2 is shown in Figure 1.
Frequency of Testing
The frequency of testing for group 1 (SMA) was calculated at 3, 6, 12, and 24 months and was 1.35, 1.06, 0.96,
and 0.90 tests/wk, respectively, demonstrating a fall in
testing frequency during the trial period (Table 2). The
testing frequency for group 2 was 0.24 tests/wk and did
not vary during the study period.
Time in Therapeutic Range
Group 1 patients (SMA) were in therapeutic range 76.5%
of the time compared with the patients in group 2
(conventional management, 63.8%, p  0.0001; Table 3).
Furthermore the group 1 patients were in the 3.5 to 3.9
INR range for only 2.3% of the time compared with 5.9%
for the group 2 patients
Complications of Anticoagulant Therapy
In the 35 patients in group 1 who have practiced SMA,
nine minor thromboembolic events and two minor
bleeding events have occurred. Among the 6 patients
who switched to conventional monitoring in the first 3
months, one has suffered a major gastrointestinal bleed,
requiring hospital admission and transfusion, and another patient has suffered a major thromboembolic
stroke. There has been no mortality in this group.
Among group 2 (conventional monitoring), 1 patient
died of a valve thrombosis, confirmed at autopsy (INR,
1.2 at time of death). Three patients have died of cardiac
(nonvalve-related) events. Autopsies were not performed. The difference in mortality (4 in group 2 versus 0
in group 1, p  0.15) was not significant statistically.
In this group, 10 minor thromboembolic events have
occurred along with two minor bleeding events.
Comment
Most patients in our study were able to learn SMA, and
we successfully trained 41 of 44 (93%) patients who
attempted SMA. Of the 3 patients (6.8%) deemed unsuitable for SMA, 1 could not grasp the concept of selfdosing and the other 2 could not consistently measure
their INR. It is interesting that one of the latter patients
who had difficulty measuring her INR was a non–insulindependent diabetic who practiced home monitoring of
her blood glucose levels. She had difficulty obtaining the
25 L of blood required for the Coaguchek at the time of
her training. Three other patients, who opted out of the
trial, also had difficulty obtaining the required amount of
blood. Newer test strips have since been developed that
require 10 L of blood, closer to the volume required for
blood glucose monitoring. Had these newer test strips
been available during the training period of our trial,
more patients may have been successful at performing
the INR measurement.
Fig 1. Distribution of tests (expressed as percentage of total number
of tests) for patients practicing self-managed anticoagulation
(COAGUCHEK, n  35) and for patients undergoing conventional
testing (CONTROLS, n  49). (INR  international normalized
ratio.)
Table 2. Frequency of Tests Performed by Group 1 Patientsa
Interval From Start
of Study
Frequency of Testing
(tests/wk)
3 months 1.35
6 months 1.06
12 months 0.96
24 months 0.90
a Patients in group 1 practiced self-managed anticoagulation (n  35 for
first year and 34 for second year). The frequency of tests performed by
group 2 did not vary.
Table 3. Comparison of Time in Therapeutic Rangea
INR Range Controls (%) Coaguchek (%)
1.5–1.9 9.4 10.0
2.0–2.4 34.0 43.0
2.5–2.9 29.8 33.5
3.0–3.4 17.2 9.5
3.5–3.9 5.85 2.3
a Time in therapeutic range was expressed as percentage of total time in
study. The therapeutic range was taken to be INR 2–3 and thus equals the
sum of rows 2 and 3.
INR  international normalized ratio.
Ann Thorac Surg SIDHU AND O’KANE 1525
2001;72:1523–7 SELF-MANAGED ANTICOAGULATION
We did not preselect our patients for this trial, and
after reviewing the data on the 9 patients who did not
continue with SMA, we were unable to identify any
characteristics, such as age or educational background,
that would aid preselection. Cromheecke and colleagues
[12] reported that 1 of 50 patients (2%) in their study was
unable to continue with SMA. Our dropout rate is higher
(20%), possibly because our unselected patient cohort is
much older (mean age, 60.8 years versus 42 years).
After 2 years, 34 of the original 51 patients (67%) were
successfully practicing SMA. Not all patients will be
suitable for this method, and indeed some may not wish
to pursue self-management. However, we believe that all
interested patients should be offered training until criteria that can predict which patients will be successful at
self-management are established.
Although our results show that patients practicing
SMA achieved better control compared with conventional management, we were unable to demonstrate a
significant reduction in anticoagulant-related complications. However, other authors have confirmed that better
control results in a reduction of anticoagulant related
complications [13, 14].
In addressing the question of testing frequency, we
advised our patients to undertake one test per week. In
our study, patients performed 0.90 tests per week during
the 2-year study period, and this is similar to the results
obtained by Cromheecke and coworkers [12], who reported a test rate of one per 8.6 days (0.81/wk). After the
first few months we were pleased to note that the testing
frequency did not exceed that recommended by us. An
increased testing frequency has obvious major implications for the cost of such a system. We do, however, have
some concern that patients were performing fewer than 1
test per week as this suggests that there may be an
element of complacency on the part of our patients, and
we believe that the success of SMA depends on consistent, regular, and frequent testing.
A quality assurance system is required to ensure that
instrument failure or drift does not result in erroneous
results, leading to inappropriate dosages. The internal
quality controls provided by the manufacturer are difficult to use. Although we instructed our patients to carry
out a quality control test with every new box of test strips
that they used and also if they obtained widely variant
INR measurements, our experience is that they do not
comply. Therefore we intend to carry out annual external
quality control comparisons with a laboratory INR for
future participants in our SMA program [15].
Self-managed anticoagulation will be expensive to introduce. However, during this 2-year study period, the
cost of the portable coagulometer has halved. We envision these costs coming down further in a manner similar
to the cost of glucometers, which have fallen to less than
a fifth of their introductory costs 15 years ago. Further
savings should result from a fall in anticoagulant-related
complications and consequent hospital costs. This is
illustrated in a recent study [16], which assessed costeffectiveness using a Markov model and hypothetical
groups and then factoring in all costs, including patientrelated costs. This study predicted a potential saving with
SMA. The weakness of their method lies in it being a
theoretical method yet to be tested in clinical practice.
Additional savings would result from reduced visits to
physicians for monitoring purposes.
Other benefits obtained by patients practicing SMA
are harder to quantify. They report greater personal
convenience, more confidence in their therapy, and the
ability to travel widely with less fear of deviation from
therapeutic range while away from home.
With increasing indications for warfarin therapy such
as atrial fibrillation [17, 18], there will inevitably be an
increased workload for the health services. Self-managed
anticoagulation may reduce this if some patients could
independently monitor and manage their own anticoagulation, with only minimal input from health
professionals.
We thank Roche Diagnostics (Lewes, Surrey, UK; formerly
Boehringer Mannheim) for providing the Coaguchek coagulometers and test strips used in this study.
Copies of our training schedule and written tests for patients are
available upon request.
References
1. Ibrahim M, O’Kane H, Cleland J, Gladstone D, Sarsam M,
Patterson C. The St. Jude Medical prosthesis. A thirteen-year
experience. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1994;108:221–30.
2. Fitzmaurice DA, Hobbs FD, Murray ET, Bradley CP, Holder
R. Evaluation of computerized decision support for oral
anticoagulation management based in primary care. Br J
Gen Pract 1996;46:533–5.
3. Horstkotte D, Piper C, Wiemer M. Optimal frequency of
patient monitoring and intensity of oral anticoagulation
therapy in valvular heart disease. J Thromb Thrombolysis
1998;5(Suppl 1):19–24.
4. Ansell JE. Anticoagulation management clinics for the outpatient control of oral anticoagulants. Curr Opin Pulm Med
1998;4:215–9.
5. Pell JP, McIver B, Stuart P, Malone DN, Alcock J. Comparison of anticoagulant control among patients attending general practice and a hospital anticoagulant clinic. Br J Gen
Pract 1993;43:152–4.
6. Good J. The monitoring of prothrombin time ratios in
general practice—a model for chronic disease care? Ir Med J
1991;84:126–7.
7. Ansell J, Holden A, Knapic N. Patient self-management of
oral anticoagulation guided by capillary (fingerstick) whole
blood prothrombin times. Arch Intern Med 1989;149:
2509–11.
8. White RH, McCurdy SA, von Marensdorff H, Woodruff DE
Jr, Leftgoff L. Home prothrombin time monitoring after the
initiation of warfarin therapy. A randomized, prospective
study. Ann Intern Med 1989;111:730–7.
9. Hasenkam JM, Kimose HH, Knudsen L, et al. Self management of oral anticoagulant therapy after heart valve replacement. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 1997;11:935–42.
10. Edmunds LH Jr, Clark RE, Cohn LH, Grunkemeier GL,
Miller DC, Weisel RD. Guidelines for reporting morbidity
and mortality after cardiac valvular operations. Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for Standardizing Definitions of Prosthetic Heart Valve Morbidity of The American Association
for Thoracic Surgery and The Society of Thoracic Surgeons.
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 1996;112:708–11.
11. Rosendaal FR, Cannegieter SC, van der Meer FJ, Briet E. A
1526 SIDHU AND O’KANE Ann Thorac Surg
SELF-MANAGED ANTICOAGULATION 2001;72:1523–7
method to determine the optimal intensity of oral anticoagulant therapy. Thromb Haemost 1993;69:236–9.
12. Cromheecke ME, Levi M, Colly LP, et al. Oral anticoagulation self-management and management by a specialist anticoagulation clinic: a randomised cross-over comparison.
Lancet 2000;356:97–102.
13. Bernardo A. [Optimizing long-term anticoagulation by patient self-management?]. Z Kardiol 1998;87(Suppl 4):75–81.
14. Chiquette E, Amato MG, Bussey HI. Comparison of an
anticoagulation clinic with usual medical care: anticoagulation control, patient outcomes, and health care costs [see
comments]. Arch Intern Med 1998;158:1641–7.
15. Preston FE. Quality control and oral anticoagulation.
Thromb Haemost 1995;74:515–20.
16. Lafata JE, Martin SA, Kaatz S, Ward RE. The costeffectiveness of different management strategies for patients
on chronic warfarin therapy. J Gen Intern Med 2000;15:31–7.
17. Adjusted-dose warfarin versus low-intensity, fixed-dose
warfarin plus aspirin for high-risk patients with atrial fibrillation. Stroke Prevention in Atrial Fibrillation III randomised
clinical trial. Lancet 1996;348:633–8.
18. Cleland JG, Cowburn PJ, Falk RH. Should all patients with
atrial fibrillation receive warfarin? Evidence from randomized clinical trials Eur Heart J 1996;17:674–81.
INVITED COMMENTARY
This study confirms the findings of several other trials
which have shown a benefit from self-managed anticoagulation in comparison to conventional management, in
terms of a greater number of International Normalized
Ratio (INR) values within the chosen target range. The
importance of good quality anticoagulation control cannot be over-emphasised, as it has been shown that poor
control, with a high percentage of INRs outside the target
range, is a major independent risk factor for reduced
long-term survival after valve replacement. Not only
should self-managed anticoagulation facilitate this
tighter control and thereby possibly enhance survival but
patients should enjoy an improved quality of life with
less reliance on hospital-based systems and greater freedom to travel.
Although there were more INR values in the target
range and a greater estimated time within this range in
the self-managed anticoagulation group, the authors
were unable to demonstrate any associated reduction in
thromboembolic and bleeding events in comparison to
conventional anticoagulation, despite a higher ratio of
aortics to mitrals in the self-managed group which
should have favored this group. There may be several
explanations for this:
1. This was a small study with relatively short
follow-up.
2. Many events labelled as ‘thromboembolic’ in all
valve series occur as the result of pathogenetic
mechanisms not directly related to the prosthesis
and uninfluenced by anticoagulation.
3. The target INR ranges were lower than those recommended for prosthetic valves, particularly in the
mitral position, and the thromboembolic rate was
high in both groups, 13.4% per year in the selfmanaged group and 11.7% per year in the conventional management group.
4. Data on adverse events were collected by postal
questionnaire. This methodology is less accurate
than direct patient interview and may overestimate
the true number of thromboembolic events if illdefined neurological symptoms are incorrectly ascribed to transient ischemic attacks (TIAs). A large
number of “false” events in both groups could then
blunt the discriminatory power of the comparison.
Further randomized trials of self-managed anticoagulation versus conventional management are required, beginning at the time of surgery and with larger numbers,
longer follow-up, and more detailed stratification of
patients according to their risk factors. Nevertheless, it is
already apparent from this and other studies that there
are many advantages of self-managed anticoagulation
and it is likely that eventually this method of anticoagulation control will become almost as commonplace as the
self-management of insulin dosage by diabetics.
Eric G. Butchart, FRCS
Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery
University Hospital
Cardiff CF14 4XW, Wales, United Kingdom
Ann Thorac Surg SIDHU AND O’KANE 1527
2001;72;1523–7 SELF-MANAGED ANTICOAGULATION
© 2001 by The Society of Thoracic Surgeons 0003-4975/01/$20.00
Published by Elsevier Science Inc PII S0003-4975(01)03194-0