For personal use only. Not to be reproduced without permission of The Lancet.
ARTICLES
THE LANCET • Vol 356 • July 8, 2000 97
Summary
Background Vitamin K antagonist treatment is effective for
prevention and treatment of thromboembolic events but
frequent laboratory control and dose-adjustment are essential.
Small portable devices have enabled patient self-monitoring of
anticoagulation and self-adjustment of the dose. We compared
this self-management of oral anticoagulant therapy with
conventional management by a specialist anticoagulation clinic
in a randomised cross-over study.
Methods 50 patients on long-term oral anticoagulant
treatment were included in a randomised controlled crossover
study. Patients were self-managed or were managed by the
anticoagulation clinic for a period of 3 months. After this period
the alternative strategy was followed for each patient.
Prothrombin time (expressed as international normalised ratio
[INR]) were measured at intervals of 1–2 weeks in both periods
without knowledge of type of management. The primary
endpoint was the number of measurements within the
therapeutic range (therapeutic target value ±50·5 INR units).
Findings There was no significant difference in the overall
quality of control of anticoagulation between the two study
periods. Patients were for 55% and for 49% of the treatment
period within a range of 0·5 from the therapeutic target INR
during self-management and anticoagulation clinic
management, respectively (p=0·06). The proportion of patients
who spent most time in the therapeutic target range was larger
during self-management than during anticoagulation clinicguided management. The odds ratio for a better control of
anticoagulation (defined as the period of time in the therapeutic
target range) during self-management compared with
anticoagulation clinic-guided management was 4·6 (95% CI
2·1–10·2). A patient-satisfaction assessment showed
superiority of self-management over conventional care.
Interpretation Self-management of INR in the population in
this study is feasible and appears to result in control of
anticoagulation that is at least equivalent to management by a
specialist anticoagulation clinic. It is also better appreciated by
patients. Larger studies are required to assess the effect of this
novel management strategy on the incidence of
thromboembolic or bleeding complications.
Lancet 2000; 356: 97–102
Introduction
Oral anticoagulant treatment with vitamin K antagonists,
such as warfarin or coumarin derivatives, has been shown
to be effective for the prevention and treatment of
thromboembolic events in various clinical
circumstances.1,2 Some patients need to be treated with
vitamin K antagonists for a long time, even life-long, such
as patients with mechanical prosthetic heart valves or
patients with recurrent venous thromboembolism due to
familial thrombophilia. The biological effect of these
compounds—ie, inhibition of the synthesis of vitamin Kdependent coagulation factors—is extremely variable,
both interindividually and intraindividually. Factors
influencing this variability include fluctuating
bioavailability, inconstant dietary vitamin K intake,
changes in other drugs that the patient might be taking,
and variable binding to plasma proteins.2,3 To prevent
under-treatment or overdosing, regular laboratory control
(by means of the prothrombin time, expressed as and
referred to throughout this paper as international
normalised ratio [INR]) of the intensity of anticoagulation and dose-adjustments are necessary.4 This
management of oral anticoagulant therapy is often
executed by hospital-based or specialised anticoagulation
clinics, such as the “Thrombosis Service” in the
Netherlands. Although this type of management is
thought to be superior to less well-organised management
of oral anticoagulation,5,6 and despite a strong
organisation, laboratory quality control, and automated,
computerised dose-adjustments, for many patients the
intensity of anticoagulation does not fall within the
“therapeutic target range” for long periods.7–10 Besides, the
visits to the anticoagulation clinic are rather timeconsuming and, for some patients, inconvenient.
Easy and reliable laboratory devices have become
available, which allow the measurement of the prothrombin
time (expressed as INR) from one drop of capillary whole
blood.11–13 Application of these devices may allow patient
self-testing of the intensity of anticoagulation and selfadjustment of the warfarin dose.14 Self-management of oral
anticoagulant therapy may result in a more individualised
approach, increased patient responsibility, and enhanced
compliance, which may lead to improvement in the
regulation of anticoagulation. An additional advantage
could be that patients can do the test at home (saving travel
and time during working hours) and are less dependent of
the anticoagulation clinic. A potential disadvantage of selfmanagement could be a poorer regulation of oral
anticoagulant therapy, due to less professional guidance.
Also, self-management of oral coagulation may
theoretically be associated with increased anxiety of
patients or even preoccupation with their disease.
Previous studies have shown the feasibility of selftesting and self-management of oral anticoagulation,15–19
while two investigations showed the potential superiority
of self-management over that of general practitioners.20,21
Oral anticoagulation self-management and management by a
specialist anticoagulation clinic: a randomised cross-over
comparison
Manon E Cromheecke, Marcel Levi, Louisa P Colly, Bas J M de Mol, Martin H Prins, Barbara A Hutten, Rachel Mak,
Katinka C J Keyzers, Harry R Büller
Department of Cardiopulmonary Surgery (M E Cromheecke MD,
B J M de Mol MD, R Mak BSc), Department of Vascular Medicine and
Department of Internal Medicine (M Levi MD, H R Büller MD,
K C J Keyzers BSc), and Department of Clinical Epidemiology and
Biostatistics (M H Prins MD, B A Hutten PhD), Academic Medical
Centre, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands;
Amsterdam Thrombosis Service (LPC), Amsterdam, Netherlands
(L P Colly MD)
Correspondence to: Marcel Levi, Department of Vascular
Medicine/Internal Medicine, Academic Medical Centre F-4,
Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, Netherlands
(e-mail: m.m.levi@amc.uva.nl)
For personal use only. Not to be reproduced without permission of The Lancet.
ARTICLES
98 THE LANCET • Vol 356 • July 8, 2000
Self-management of anticoagulation has, however, so far
not been compared with management by a specialised
anticoagulation clinic. The aim of the present study was to
directly compare the quality of self-management of oral
anticoagulation with conventional care by the Thrombosis
Service in the Netherlands in a randomised cross-over study.
Methods
Study design
The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board
of the Academic Medical Centre of the University of
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
The study was done in two phases. In the first phase a
direct comparison was made between self-measurement
and self-dosing of vitamin K antagonists and
anticoagulation-clinic-based management. The second
phase of the study was done as a randomised cross-over
study comparing self-management of oral anticoagulation
with anticoagulation-clinic management.
In the first phase 15 patients on chronic (more than 6
months) anticoagulant therapy were educated and trained
to measure their own INR and to adjust their dose of
warfarin. Patients measured their INR at home at weekly
intervals during a 6 week period. On the basis of this INR
patients devised their own dosing schedule for the next
week. Within 2 h they came to the anticoagulation clinic to
have their INR measured using blood obtained by
venipuncture. An experienced physician of the
anticoagulation clinic then proposed a dosing scheme
based on the anticoagulation-clinic INR value, in most
cases with a computerised dosing program. This part of
the study allowed us to establish the feasibility of selfmeasurement and self-dosing of anticoagulation by
patients and the concordance between self-measured INR
and clinic INR as well as between self-dosing of oral
anticoagulation and physician-based dosing. The
anticoagulation clinic INR and dosing scheme formed the
basis for patient management.
In the randomised cross-over comparison (second
phase) 50 patients on chronic anticoagulant therapy with
oral agents were educated and trained to self-manage
anticoagulation. Patients were then randomised (by sealed
envelopes) to either 3 months of anticoagulation
management by the specialised anticoagulation clinic
(Thrombosis Service) or three months of self-management
of anticoagulation. After 3 months, the alternative
management strategy was used. To be able to assess the
quality of anticoagulation in both study periods, the INR
was measured at intervals of 1–2 weeks in all patients in
both study periods by a central laboratory. These results
were not made available to patients or managing
physicians. The frequency of INR self-testing by patients
during the self-management period and the frequency of
INR determination by the Thrombosis Service during the
anticoagulation clinic period was not more often than once
weekly and at least once in 2 weeks. The primary endpoint
of the study was the number of measurements that were
within 0·5 INR units from the therapeutic target INR
during each study period. Secondary endpoints included
the percentage of time in the target range during the study
period, the number of patients who were in the therapeutic
target range for 0–100% of the time during each period,
and the number of patients who achieved a better control
of anticoagulation during one of the two management
strategies.
Patients
Consecutive ambulant patients, seen at the outpatient
departments of Cardiology and Internal Medicine of the
Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, who received
long-term anticoagulation and who were self-supporting
were eligible for the study. The most important
demographic and medical characteristics of the
consenting patients are given in table 1. Indications for
anticoagulation were prosthetic heart valves, prevention of
arterial thrombosis (mostly in patients with atrial
fibrillation), and secondary prevention of venous
thromboembolism in patients with familial thrombophilia.
Education of patients
All patients underwent a structured educational
programme to be able to do anticoagulation selfmanagement. This educational programme was adapted
from previously published educational programmes.21,22
Briefly, the program consisted of two 2 h sessions. In the
first session a small group of patients (four to six per
group) received structured and interactive teaching on the
function of the coagulation system, and the principles and
monitoring of anticoagulant therapy. Instructions on selfmeasurement of the INR by means of a capillary finger
stick and use of an automated device was given via a video
presentation and live demonstration. Patients were then
given the opportunity to measure their own INR (at least
once or as many times as they wished) in the presence of
an instructor. In the 10 days between the first and the
second session, patients had the opportunity to measure
their INR in their own environment and to report their
experience in the second session. This second session was
also used to learn and practise how to devise a proper
oral-anticoagulant dosing scheme. For teaching purposes,
a standard dose-adaptation nomogram was used, but
patients were encouraged to adjust and tailor this
nomogram according to their individual experience. After
concluding the educational programme patients started
self-management of anticoagulation. A 24 h help desk was
set up to answer any questions or to assist with any
problem that might arise.
Measurement of INR
Venous blood (9 vol) was collected in 3·2% sodium citrate
(1 vol) and plasma was obtained by centrifugation at
1800g for 20 min. The prothrombin time (PT) was
measured in plasma by Tromborel-S reagent (Dade
Behring, Leusden, Netherlands, ISI value 1.19) on a
Elekra 1600 coagulometer (MLA, Pleasantville, NY). PT
values were expressed as an INR according to
international convention. Self-measurement of INR was
done on capillary blood (obtained by a fingertip puncture,
Softclix lancet system) on a Coaguchek coagulometer
(Roche Diagnostics, Almere, Netherlands), with
Coaguchek PT teststrips (Roche Diagnostics).23,24
Subjective quality of care assessment
A self-perceived assessment of the quality of care was
made by patients using a structured questionnaire
containing 32 items, which has been described
previously.21 This questionnaire measures patients’
feelings about oral anticoagulation, general treatment
topics, treatment satisfaction, self-efficacy, daily frictions
and worries, and social issues. For each category a
minimum of 1 point (total dissatisfaction) and a
For personal use only. Not to be reproduced without permission of The Lancet.
who were using phenprocoumon had a smaller variability
in INR values than those who were using acenocoumarol,
but this difference did not reach significance. There was
also no relevant difference in the percentage of values
within the therapeutic range between these two groups.
A good agreement was observed between self-devised
and anticoagulation-clinic-prescribed dosing schemes. A
complete agreement in dosing scheme (total week’s dose
of anticoagulant agent and division of this dose over the
days of the week) was seen in 68% of the cases. The mean
difference in self-proposed versus clinic-based dosing
schemes (expressed as total week’s dose of oral
anticoagulant agent) was 4% (SD 10). A difference of
10% or more in dose between the self-devised scheme and
the clinic scheme was found in 13% and a difference of
15% or more between the schemes was present in 2%.
There was no discrepancy concerning the dosing schemes
in divergent directions (ie, patients proposing to take a
higher dose and clinic physicians proposing to take a
lower dose) in any of the dosing schedules.
Comparison between self-management and thrombosis
service
The frequency of INR determination in the selfmanagement period was once every 8·6 days, compared
with a test frequency of once every 9·0 days in the
Thrombosis Service period.
Of the 50 patients included in this phase of the trial,
one patient turned out to be unable to self-manage
anticoagulation due to progressive visual impairment. All
other patients were able to self-manage their
anticoagulation during the study and the help-desk was
infrequently consulted (0·3 times per patient in 3
months). In the remaining 49 patients the mean difference
of all measured INRs from the therapeutic target value
was 10% (SD 20) during the 3 months of selfmanagement compared with 12% (22) in the period
managed by the thrombosis service. There was no
significant difference in the control of anticoagulation
between the two study periods (figure 2). During selfmanagement 55·0% of the measurements were less than
0·5 from the intended therapeutic target INR, whereas
this figure was 49% in the Thrombosis Service
management period (p=0·06, odds ratio 1·2, 95% CI
ARTICLES
THE LANCET • Vol 356 • July 8, 2000 99
maximum of 6 points (complete satisfaction) could be
scored. This assessment has been validated in a previous
study.21 The questionnaire was submitted to the
participating patients before and after they finished the
period of self-management. A control group of patients on
oral anticoagulation receiving regular anticoagulationclinic-based care (matched for age, sex, and indication for
anticoagulation) served as a reference population. The
internal reliability coefficient of the questionnaire
(Cronbach-) was assessed as previously described.25
Sample size and statistical analysis
All data are presented as mean (SD). The agreement
between self-measurements and laboratory measurements
in the initial phase of the study was analysed as previously
described.26,27 The accuracy of the control of
anticoagulation was assessed by evaluating the number of
INR values within and outside the therapeutic target
range and by measuring the length of time of adequate
anticoagulation. The time in the therapeutic target range
was calculated by means of linear interpolation.28 The
number of 50 patients for the randomised cross-over
study was based on an assumption, as follows. From
previous studies it can be concluded that, with
Thrombosis-Service-managed anticoagulant therapy, at a
given time about 20–40% of patients are not in the
therapeutic target range.7–9 On the assumption that if 20%
of patients are not in the therapeutic target range during
the observation period (ie, 120 occasions per period), a
significant difference of 15% or more (-error 0.05, power
0.8) in accuracy of anticoagulation will be detected
between the two groups with a total study population of
50 patients. If no such difference was observed, the
management strategies could be considered to be
equivalent. For comparisons of groups the Wilcoxon
signed-rank test and two-tailed Fisher’s exact test were
used.
Results
Feasibility and safety of self-management
In the first phase of the study a direct comparison of INRs
(self-measured and measured at the anticoagulation
clinic) and warfarin-dosing schemes (self-devised or
clinic-based) was made for the 6-week study period. All
patients were able to measure the INR at home and to
devise a dosing scheme for the next week. There was an
acceptable correlation between the self-measured INR
and the clinic INR (figure 1). The mean difference
between all self-measurements and all clinic
measurements was 12·3% (SD 10·1), with a  value for
the agreement between the two methods of 0·64 (limits of
agreement 0·08 [1·04], weighed  0·46). The intra-class
correlation coefficient was 0·91 (95% CI 0·86–0·95). A
difference of more than 0·5 and 1·0 units of the selfmeasured INR from the corresponding clinic value was
seen in 21% and 5% of the measurements, respectively.
When analysed to find to what extent such a deviation of
the test result would lead to a different dosing scheme
(according to the proposed dosing algorithm), this would
have been the case in 2% of measurements. The relation
between the self-measured INR value (y) and the
reference laboratory value could be expressed by the linear
regression equation y=0·993x0·057. The correlation (r)
between the self-measured INR and the anticoagulation
clinic INR was 0·85. As suggested by figure 1, patients
7·0
6·0
5·0
4·0
3·0
2·0
1·0
1·02·03·04·0
Laboratory INR
Self-measured INR
5·06·07·0
Figure 1: Correlation between the self-measured INR from
whole capillary blood at home and the virtually simultaneously
measured laboratory INR from a venous blood sample
The filled symbols and the open symbols represent measurements from
patients taking phenoprocoumon or acenocoumarol, respectively.
For personal use only. Not to be reproduced without permission of The Lancet.
ARTICLES
100 THE LANCET • Vol 356 • July 8, 2000
1·0–1·6). In particular, in patients in whom the control of
anticoagulation was fairly good, the percentage of time in
the target range was larger for patients on selfmanagement than during management by the thrombosis
service (figure 2). The number of patients having more
than 50% of the time in the therapeutic target range
(defined as the therapeutic target value ±0·5) was 29
(60%) in the self-management period versus 25 (52%) in
the thrombosis service period. The number of patients
with more than 75% of the time in the therapeutic target
range was 13 (27%) during self-management versus 6
(12%) in the thrombosis-service period (2·5, 1·0–6·7). Of
the 49 patients 34 had a better control of anticoagulation
(defined as the period of time in the therapeutic target
range) during self-management than during
anticoagulation clinic-guided management (4·6,
2·1–10·2). In five of 49 patients there was no difference
and in ten of 49 patients the anticoagulation-clinic
management resulted in a better control of
anticoagulation than self-management. The number of
dose adjustments was equal in both study periods and also
the magnitude of the dose-adjustments was not
significantly different between the two study periods.
Serious under-anticoagulation or over-anticoagulation
(INR <1·5 or >5·0) occurred during 3·5% of the selfmanagement period and during 5·3% of the
anticoagulation-clinic-management period (p=0·07).
No relation between a better control of anticoagulation
and age, educational level, or indication for
anticoagulation could be established.
No major bleeding episodes (defined as bleeding
requiring hospital admission or transfusion or any centralnervous-system bleeding) were seen in either management
group during the observation period. In the
anticoagulation clinic-management group three minor
bleedings occurred (one joint bleeding after minor trauma
at an INR of 7·5, one minor calf-muscle bleeding at an
INR of 4·2, and one episode of recurrent nose bleeding at
an INR of 6·5), whereas in the self-management period
one minor nose bleeding (INR 2·4) occurred. In the
anticoagulation-clinic-management period there was one
episode of clinically suspected recurrent venous
thrombosis (though not confirmed by objective testing) at
an INR or 1·4 and one patient with a prosthetic aortic
valve suffered from a transient ischaemic attack. During
self-management there were no symptoms and signs of
thrombotic complications. The differences in clinical
outcome were not significant. The order of management
in the study did not affect any of the outcome factors; in
other words a carry-over effect could not be shown.
Subjective quality-of-care assessment
The quality-of-care questionnaire was completed by 45
participants at the start and the end of the selfmanagement study period. A total of 44 patients on
Thrombosis Service anticoagulation, matched for age, sex,
100
75
50
25
Patients (%)
0
025 50
Time in target range (%)
75 100
Figure 2: Comparison of control of anticoagulation (expressed
as percentage of the time in the therapeutic target range) in
patients during self-management (unbroken line) and during
anticoagulation clinic-guided management (broken line)
Overall, there is no significant difference but the proportion of patients
more than 50% of the time in the therapeutic target range is larger during
self-management than during anticoagulation-clinic-based management
(p<0·05).
Phase I (n=15) Phase 2 (n=50)
Age (years) 39 (range 19–58) 42 (range 22–71)
M/F ratio 7/8 29/20
Indication for anticoagulation
Artificial heart valve 5 (33%) 23 (46%)
Arterial thromboembolism 4 (27%) 12 (24%)
Venous thromboembolism 6 (40%) 15 (30%)
Angicoagulant agent
Acenocoumarol 10 (67%) 32 (64%)
Phenprocoumon 5 (33%) 18 (36%)
Aimed target range INR
2·0–3·0 3 (20%) 3 (6%)
2·5–3·5 5 (33%) 16 (32%)
3·0–4·0 5 (33%) 25 (50%)
3·5–4·5 2 (14%) 6 (12%)
Table 1: Characteristics of patients in the INR comparison
study (phase I) and in the cross-over comparison (phase II)
Self- Conventional- p Cronbach-
management care group
group (n=45) (n=44)
Age 42 (16) 42 (12) . . . .
M/F ratio 28:17 25:19 . . . .
Indication for anticoagulation
Artificial heart valve 23 (51%) 21 (48%)
Arterial thromboembolism 12 (24%) 10 (23%)
Venous thromboembolism 10 (22%) 12 (27%)
Target range INR
2·0–3·0 2 (4%) 2 (5%)
2·5–3·5 13 (29%) 16 (36%)
3·0–4·0 24 (53%) 22 (50%)
3·5–4·5 6 (13%) 4 (9%)
Years on anticoagulant 3·9 (2·2) 4·1 (2·1)
treatment
Highest school education
University/advanced education 20 (44%) 19 (43%)
Intermediate education 21 (47%) 21 (48%)
Primary education 4 (9%) 4 (9%)
General treatment satisfaction 4·8 (1·2) 4·0 (1·5) 0·015 0·74
Self-efficacy 5·4 (0·6) 4·5 (1·0) <0·001 0·70
Daily worries 1·8 (0·5) 2·6 (0·5) <0·001 0·83
Distress 2·5 (0·8) 2·9 (1·1) 0·022 0·76
Social issues 1·7 (0·6) 2·7 (0·9) <0·001 0·79
The comparison is made between patients participating in the cross-over study at the
end of the self-management period and a matched control group receiving conventional
care, ie, management of oral anticoagulation by the specialised anticoagulation clinic.
Values are mean (SD).
Table 2: Patients’ characteristics and comparison of
subjective quality-of-care assessment
For personal use only. Not to be reproduced without permission of The Lancet.
oral anticoagulation and a number of retrospective
cohort studies have indicated that self-management of
anticoagulant treatment was equivalent or superior to
conventional care.1§6–18 Part of this effect may be
explained by the feasibility of more frequent control of
the INR. In multicentre prospective randomised trials it
was shown that control of anticoagulation was better in
patients who managed their anticoagulation themselves
compared with patients who had their anticoagulation
managed by a general practitioner.20,21 The present
report is the first to indicate that self-management is at
least as effective as management of anticoagulation by
specialised anticoagulation centres.
In the present study the adequacy of anticoagulant
control was expressed in terms of being in the
therapeutic target range. In fact, the incidence of
bleeding or thrombotic episodes would provide a
potentially more revelant outcome assessment.
However, the size and the design of our study did not
permit us to establish a significant difference in these
factors. Nevertheless, clinical studies show that there is
a clear relation between adequate control of
anticoagulation and a lower incidence of bleeding and
thrombotic complications in patients on oral
anticoagulants.9,29 Hence, the small improvement during
self-management of oral anticoagulation, as shown in
our study, may potentially be extrapolated to a
beneficial effect of this management strategy on clinical
outcome.
Although we did not specifically select patients for our
study, a certain degree of selection cannot be excluded.
Indeed, young patients or patients with a busy working
or social life might be over-represented in our study
group. Strictly speaking, we can limit our conclusions
only to the feasibility of self-measurement of INR and
self-dosing to the type of patients included in our study.
However, others have found that all patients who are
able to lead an independent and self-supporting life are
in principle capable of self-management of
anticoagulation, irrespective of education and social
status. Other education and self-management
programmes for patients, such as self-control and selfmanagement of insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus,
have been similar in this respect.34 In our practice,
limiting factors for self-measurement of the INR with
the Coaguchek device were mainly physical factors, such
as visual impairment. Another limitation of our study is
that the results apply only to patients on chronic
anticogulant therapy and not to those just starting oral
anticoagulant agents.
Despite the ability of patients to self-manage oral
anticoagulation, adequate support remains necessary.
Ongoing education, counsel in case of sustained
dysregulation of anticoagulation, or advice on
interruption of therapy in case of bleeding or the need to
undergo an invasive procedure are, among others, issues
that need to be taken care of. In the organisation of such
support the anticoagulation clinics should play a major
role. Nevertheless, self-management of anticoagulation
may be a cost-effective approach, as was shown in a
previous analysis.35
In conclusion, we have shown that self-management
of oral anticoagulant therapy is feasible and at least as
effective as management by a specialised anticoagulation
clinic. In addition, self-management was well accepted
and appreciated by the participating patients. SelfARTICLES
THE LANCET • Vol 356 • July 8, 2000 101
and indication for anticoagulation, formed the control
group. Results from patients at the start of the selfmanagement period were not different from the results
obtained in the control group. There were no differences
between the two groups in INR target ranges, number of
years on anticoagulant treatment, and the degree of
education (table 2). The internal reliability of the
questionnaire was acceptable as indicated by the
Cronbach- values. There were significant differences in
all five categories of the questionnaire in favour of the
self-management group (table 2). Scores for general
treatment satisfaction and self-efficacy were higher in
the self-management group, whereas the score for daily
anxieties, distress, and strain were significantly lower.
Discussion
Oral anticoagulation with warfarin is an effective
measure for the treatment and prevention of arterial and
venous thromboembolism. However, the substantial
interindividual and intraindividual variation in the
biological effect of vitamin K antagonists renders many
patients outside the therapeutic target range over long
periods of time. This is cumbersome for several reasons.
First, clinical studies show that under-coagulation and
over-coagulation enhance the risk of adverse clinical
outcomes—ie, thromboembolism and bleeding,
respectively.29–31 For example, the annual incidence of
major bleeding in patients on vitamin K antagonists for
various indications is 0·9–2·5% and this risk increases
several-fold in patients with higher INRs. Hence, the
variability in the intensity of anticoagulation necessitates
frequent laboratory control and dose-adjustment, which
constitutes a second drawback of oral anticoagulation.
Previous studies have shown that anticoagulation
management by specialised anticoagulation clinics
results in better control of anticoagulation compared
with control in general practice.5,6 However, in certain
areas this may even amplify the practical problem of
frequent checks. Self-management of anticoagulation
may overcome the need for frequent visits to an
anticoagulation clinic, may achieve maximal
individualisation, and improved compliance, which are
all factors that have been shown to improve the quality
of anticoagulation.29–32 In our study we show that selfmanagement of oral anticoagulation results in a control
of anticoagulation that is at least as good and potentially
superior to control by a specialised anticoagulation
service in a randomised cross-over trial. Patients
appeared to be able to measure their INR adequately
and to devise appropriate dosing schemes for their
warfarin. Some variation between the INR values
obtained with the portable self-testing device and
laboratory INRs was detectable. This is in accordance
with previous reports, but in fact the variation was not
larger than the variation that may be encountered
between different laboratories measuring an INR value
from a single sample.23,33 There was a slight benefit in the
control of anticoagulation during the self-management
period in comparison with the period that
anticoagulation was managed by the anticoagulation
clinic. In addition, patient-independence of the clinics
considerably improved patient satisfaction with their
anticoagulant treatment in comparison to patients
receiving conventional care, which confirms identical
findings in one of the previous studies.21 Previous studies
have also shown the feasibility of self-management of
For personal use only. Not to be reproduced without permission of The Lancet.
ARTICLES
102 THE LANCET • Vol 356 • July 8, 2000
management of anticoagulation may be considered as a
novel, patient-friendly, and effective strategy to improve
long-term treatment with anticoagulant agents.
References
1 Hirsh J. Oral anticoagulant drugs. N Engl J Med 1991; 324: 1865–75.
2 Hirsh J, Dalen JE, Anderson DR, et al. Oral anticoagulants:
mechanism of action, clinical effectiveness, and optimal therapeutic
range. Chest 1998; 114: 445S–69S.
3 O’Reilly RA, Aggeler PM. Determinants of the response to oral
anticoagulant drugs in man. Pharmacol Rev 1970; 22: 35–96.
4 Fairweather RB, Ansell J, van den Besselaar AM, et al. College of
American Pathologists Conference XXXI on laboratory monitoring of
anticoagulant therapy: laboratory monitoring of oral anticoagulant
therapy. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1998; 122: 768–81.
5 Cortelazzo S, Finazzi G, Viero P, et al. Thrombotic and hemorrhagic
complications in patients with mechanical heart valve prosthesis
attending an anticoagulation clinic. Thromb Haemost 1993; 69:
316–20.
6 Errichetti AM, Holden A, Ansell J. Management of oral anticoagulant
therapy. Experience with an anticoagulation clinic. Arch Intern Med
1984; 144: 1966–68.
7 van der Meer J, Hillege HL, Kootstra GJ, et al. Prevention of one-year
vein-graft occlusion after aortocoronary-bypass surgery: a comparison
of low-dose aspirin, low-dose aspirin plus dipyridamole, and oral
anticoagulants. The CABADAS Research Group of the Interuniversity
Cardiology Institute of The Netherlands. Lancet 1993; 342: 257–64.
8 The Aspect Research Group. Effect of long-term oral anticoagulant
treatment on mortality and cardiovascular morbidity after myocardial
infarction. Anticoagulants in the Secondary Prevention of Events in
Coronary Thrombosis (ASPECT) Research Group. Lancet 1994; 343:
499–503.
9 Cannegieter SC, Rosendaal FR, Wintzen AR, van der Meer FL,
Vandenbroucke JP, Briet E. Optimal oral anticoagulant therapy in
patients with mechanical heart values. N Engl J Med 1995; 333:
11–17.
10 Poller L, Shiach CR, MacCallum K, et al. Multicentre randomised
study of computerised anticoagulant dosage: European Concerted
Action on Anticoagulation. Lancet 1998; 352: 1505–09.
11 Leaning KE, Ansell JE. Advances in the monitoring of oral
anticoagulation: point-of-care testing, patient self-monitoring , and
patient self-management. J Thromb Thrombolys 1996; 3: 377–83.
12 Tripodi A, Chantarangkul V, Clerici M, Negri B, Mannucci PM.
Determination of the international sensitivity index of a new nearpatient testing device to monitor oral anticoagulant therapy. Thromb
Haemost 1997; 78: 855–58.
13 Kitchen S, Preston FE. Monitoring oral anticoagulant treatment with
the TAS near-patient test system: comparison with conventional
thromboplastins. J Clin Pathol 1997; 50: 951–56.
14 Ansell JE. Empowering patients to monitor and manage oral
anticoagulation therapy. JAMA 1999; 281: 182–83.
15 White RH, McCurdy SA, von Marsendorff H, Woodruff DEJ,
Leftgoff L. Home prothrombin time monitoring after the initiation of
warfarin therapy: a randomized, prospective study. Ann Intern Med
1989; 111: 730–37.
16 Bernardo A. Experience with patient self-management of oral
anticoagulation. J Thromb Thrombolys 1996; 2: 321–25.
17 Anderson DR, Harrison L, Hirsh J. Evaluation of a portable
prothrombin time monitor for home use by patients who require longterm oral anticoagulant therapy. Arch Intern Med 1993; 153: 1441–47.
18 Ansell JE, Patek N, Ostrovsky D, Nozzolillo E, Peterson AM, Fish L.
Long-term patient self-management of oral anticoagulation. Arch
Intern Med 1995; 155: 2185–89.
19 Hasenkam JM, Kimose HH, Knudsen L, et al. Self management of
oral anticoagulant therapy after heart valve replacement. Eur J
Cardiothor Surg 1997; 11: 935–42.
20 Horstkotte D, Piper C, Wiemer M, Schulte HD, Schultheiss HP.
Improvement of prognosis by home prothrombin estimation in
patients with life-long anticoagulant therapy. Eur Heart J 1996; 17
(suppl): 230.
21 Sawicki PT. A structured teaching and self-management program for
patients receiving oral anticoagulation: a randomized control trial.
Working Group for the Study of Patient Self-Management of Oral
Anticoagulation. JAMA 1999; 281: 145–50.
22 Morsdorf S, Erdlenbruch W, Taborski U, et al. Training of patients
for self-management of oral anticoagulant therapy: standards, patient
suitability, and clinical aspects. Semin Thromb Hemost 1999; 25:
109–16.
23 Van den Besselaar AMHP, Breddin K, Lutze G, et al. Multicenter
evaluation of a new capillary blood prothrombin time monitoring
system. Blood Coagul Fibrinolys 1995; 6: 726–32.
24 Douketic JD, Lane A, Milne J, Ginsberg JS. Accuracy of a portable
International Normalization Ratio monitor in outpatients receiving
long-term oral anticoagulant therapy: comparison with a laboratory
reference standard using clinically relevant criteria for agreement.
Thromb Res 1998; 92: 11–17.
25 Todd C, Bradley C. Evaluating the design and development of
psychological scales. In: Bradley C, ed. Handbook of psychology and
diabetes: a guide to psychological measurement in diabetes research
and practice. Newark, NJ: Harwood Academic Publishers, 1994:
15–42.
26 Bland JM, Altman DG. Statistical methods for assessing agreement
between two methods of clinical measurement. Lancet 1986; ii:
307–310.
27 Kramer MS, Feinstein AR. Clinical biostatistics: LIV—the
biostatistics of concordance. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1981; 29: 111–23.
28 Azar AJ, Deckers JW, Rosendaal FR, et al. Assessment of therapeutic
quality control in a long-term anticoagulant trial in post-myocardial
infarction patients. Thromb Haemost 1994; 72: 347–51.
29 Levine MN, Roaskob G, Landefeld S, Kearon C. Haemorrhagic
complications of anticoagulant treatment. Chest 1998; 114: 511S–23S.
30 Landefeld CS, Beyth RJ. Anticoagulant-related bleeding: Clinical
epidemiology, prediction, and prevention. Am J Med 1993; 95:
315–28.
31 van der Meer JF, Rosedaal FR, Vandenbroucke JP, Briet E. Bleeding
complications in oral anticoagulant therapy. An analysis of risk factors.
Arch Intern Med 1993; 153: 1557–62.
32 van der Meer FJ, Briet E, Vandenbroucke JP, Stramek DI,
Versuijs MH, Rosendaal FR. The role of compliance as a cause of
instability in oral anticoagulant therapy. Br J Haematol 1997; 98:
893–900.
33 Kaatz SS, White RH, Hill J, Mascha E, Humphries JE, Becker DM.
Accuracy of laboratory and portable monitor international normalized
ratio determinations. Comparison with a criterion standard. Arch
Intern Med 155: 1861–67.
34 Kok G, van den Borne B, Mullen PD. Effectiveness of health
education and health promotion: meta-analysesof effect
studies and determinants of effectiveness. Pat Educat Couns 1997;
30: 19–27.
35 Taborski U, Wittstamm FJ, Bernardo A. Cost-effectiveness of selfmanaged anticoagulant therapy in Germany. Semin Thromb Hemost
1999; 25: 103–08.