e292 Canadian Family Physician • Le Médecin de famille canadien | Vol 57: August • août 2011
This article has been peer reviewed.
Can Fam Physician 2011;57:e292-8
Research | Web exclusive
Patient self-management of warfarin therapy
Pragmatic feasibility study in Canadian primary care
Brian E. Grunau MD CCFP Matthew O. Wiens PharmD Kenneth K. Harder MD FCFP
Abstract
Objective To investigate the effectiveness of patient self-management (PSM) of anticoagulation using warfarin in
a typical primary care site in Canada and to determine the feasibility of conducting a future large-scale trial in this
setting.
Design An 8-month pragmatic open-label randomized crossover trial.
Setting A typical Canadian primary care practice in British Columbia.
Intervention Patients were randomized to PSM or physician management for 4 months, after which allocation was
reversed. The PSM group members were instructed to monitor their serum
international normalized ratio (INR) at community laboratories and to
adjust their warfarin doses independently using provided nomograms.
Education on warfarin dose adjustment was limited to a single 15-minute
office visit.
Main outcome measures  The primary outcome was the proportion
of INR values in the therapeutic range among participants. Feasibility
outcomes included proportion of eligible patients consenting, patients’
preference of management strategy, patients’ satisfaction, and visits or
phone communication with physicians regarding dose adjustment. Safety
outcomes included bleeding or thromboembolic events.
Results  Eleven patients completed the trial, contributing 99 patientmonths of monitoring and providing 122 INR measures. The mean
proportion of INR values in therapeutic range among subjects in the
PSM and physician-management groups was 82% and 80%, respectively
(P = .82). The improvement in patient satisfaction with PSM was not
significant. Ten of the 11 patients preferred PSM to physician management
and elected to continue with this strategy after study completion (P=.001).
No calls or visits were made to the physician regarding dose adjustment
during the PSM period. There were no episodes of major bleeding or
thromboembolic events.
Conclusion  Patient self-management was not demonstrated to be
superior to standard care, but was easily implemented and was the
method preferred by patients. Our feasibility outcomes justify a larger trial
and suggest that subject recruitment and protocol adherence would not
pose barriers for such a study.
Trial registration number NCT00925028 (ClinicalTrials.gov).
EDITOR’S KEY POINTS
• Maintenance of a therapeutic international normalized ratio (INR) in patients
has proven to be difficult, with patients
spending an average of only 57% to
66% of the time within the therapeutic
range. Patient self-management (PSM) is a
concept in which patients obtain their INR
values directly and adjust their warfarin
doses independently.
• Data from randomized controlled trials
(RCTs) examining PSM have consistently
shown an increased proportion of INR
values in the therapeutic range; decreased
rates of thromboembolic events and major
hemorrhage; and, in one study, a mortality benefit. Further, it has been shown
that patients are more satisfied with PSM
strategies, that PSM is cost-effective, and
that PSM is superior to both usual care and
care from tertiary anticoagulation clinics.
Despite this, PSM has not been adopted
in routine primary care in Canada, possibly because of its reliance on expensive
personal coagulation analyzers and tertiary
hospital-based education programs.
• The primary objective was to determine
whether a PSM strategy implemented in
a typical Canadian family practice clinic
could reliably and consistently maintain
therapeutic INR values; results showed that
a simple PSM strategy in a typical primary
care practice with no additional resources
is feasible and was preferred by patients.
Vol 57: August • août 2011 | Canadian Family Physician • Le Médecin de famille canadien e293
Autogestion par le patient
du traitement à la warfarine
Étude de faisabilité pragmatique en contexte de soins primaires au Canada
Brian E. Grunau MD CCFP Matthew O. Wiens PharmD Kenneth K. Harder MD FCFP
Résumé
Objectif  Vérifier l’efficacité de l’autogestion par le patient (AGP) du traitement par l’anticoagulant warfarine dans
une clinique soins primaires typique du Canada et établir la faisabilité d‘un essai éventuel à grande échelle dans ce
contexte.
Type d’étude Un essai pragmatique randomisé croisé sans insu de 8 mois.
Contexte  Une clinique de soins primaires typique du Canada située en
Colombie-Britannique.
Intervention  Les patients ont été répartis au hasard entre l’AGP et la
gestion par un médecin pour une durée de 4 mois, après quoi la répartition
a été inversée. On a demandé aux membres du groupe AGP de faire mesurer
leur RIN par des laboratoires communautaires et d’ajuster eux-mêmes leur
dose de warfarine à l’aide des nomogrammes fournis. Une seule visite de 15
minutes au bureau suffisait pour apprendre à ajuster les doses.
Pr inc ipaux paramètres à l ’étude   Le principal paramètre était
la proportion de valeurs d’INR des patients situées dans la fourchette
thérapeutique. Les paramètres de faisabilité comprenaient la proportion
des patients admissibles qui acceptaient, la stratégie préférée des patients,
leur satisfaction et les visites ou appels téléphoniques aux médecins pour
ajustement des doses. Les paramètres de sécurité incluaient les hémorragies
et les accidents thromboemboliques.
Résultats  Onze patients ont complété l’essai, pour un total de 99 moispatients de monitorage et 122 mesures de RIN. La proportion des valeurs
de RIN dans la fourchette thérapeutique était en moyenne de 82 % dans
le groupe AGP et de 80 % dans le groupe géré par un médecin (P = ,82).
L’utilisation de l’AGP n’apportait pas une amélioration significative de la
satisfaction des patients. Dix des 11 patients ont préféré l’AGP plutôt que
la gestion par un médecin et ont choisi de continuer avec cette stratégie à
la fin de l’étude (P= ,001). Il n’y a pas eu d’appel ou de visite au médecin
pour ajustement des doses au cours de l’AGP. On n’a pas enregistré
d’hémorragies importantes ni d’accidents thromboemboliques.
Conclusion  Même si l’autogestion par le patient ne s’est pas révélée
supérieure au traitement standard, elle a été facile à mettre en pratique et
c’était la méthode préférée des patients. Nos indices de faisabilité justifient
un essai plus étendu et laissent croire que le recrutement de volontaires et
l’adhésion au protocole ne feront pas obstacle à une telle étude.
Numéro d’enregistrement de l’étude NCT00925028 (ClinicalTrials.gov).
Points de repère du rédacteur
• Il s’avère difficile de maintenir un rapport
international normalisé (RIN) chez les
patients, qui ne passent en moyenne que
57 à 66% du temps à l’intérieur de la
fourchette thérapeutique. L’autogestion
par le patient (AGP) est un concept selon
lequel les patients reçoivent leurs valeurs
d’INR directement et ajustent eux-mêmes
leur dose de warfarine.
• Les données d’essais cliniques
randomisés (ECR) portant sur l’AGP ont
régulièrement montré une augmentation
de la proportion de valeurs de RIN dans la
fourchette thérapeutique, des taux plus
faibles d’accidents thromboemboliques
et d’hémorragies importantes et, dans
une étude, une moindre mortalité. On
a aussi constaté que les patients sont
plus satisfaits avec les stratégies d’AGP,
que l’AGP est économique et qu’elle est
supérieure à la gestion habituelle et à celle
des cliniques tertiaires d’anticoagulation.
Malgré ces avantages, l’AGP n’a pas été
adoptée dans les soins primaires habituels
au Canada, peut-être parce qu’elle exige
des analyseurs personnels dispendieux et
des programmes de formation dispensés
dans les hôpitaux de soins tertiaires.
• L’objectif premier était de déterminer si
une stratégie d’AGP mise à l’essai dans une
clinique de médecine familiale canadienne
typique pouvait maintenir de façon fiable
et régulière des valeurs thérapeutiques
de RIN; les résultats ont montré qu’une
stratégie simple d’AGP dans une clinique
de soins primaires sans ressources
additionnelles est faisable et que les
patients l’ont préférée.
Cet article a fait l’objet d’une révision par des pairs.
Can Fam Physician 2011;57:e292-8
Exclusivement sur le web | Recherche
e294 Canadian Family Physician • Le Médecin de famille canadien | Vol 57: August • août 2011
Research | Patient self-management of warfarin therapy
Oral vitamin K antagonists such as warfarin are
frequently prescribed because of their ease of
administration and proven benefit for a variety
of conditions (eg, atrial fibrillation, mechanical heart
valves, or venous thromboembolism). Since the introduction of warfarin into routine clinical practice, maintenance of a therapeutic international normalized ratio
(INR) in patients has proven to be difficult, with patients
spending an average of only 57% to 66% of the time
within the therapeutic range.1
Patient self-management (PSM) is a concept in which
patients obtain their INR values directly and adjust their
warfarin doses independently. Data from randomized
controlled trials (RCTs) examining PSM have consistently shown an increased proportion of INR values in
therapeutic range,2-7 decreased rates of thromboembolic
events and substantial hemorrhages,2,8 and in one
study a mortality benefit.9 Further, it has been shown
that patients are more satisfied with PSM strategies,2,10
that PSM is cost-effective,11 and that PSM is superior to
both usual care3,5 and care from tertiary anticoagulation clinics.6,7 A recent systematic review found that the
average time in the therapeutic range for PSM was 72%
compared with 50% in community settings.1 Guidelines
from the American College of Chest Physicians state
that “in patients who are suitably selected and trained,
PST [patient self-testing] or PSM is an effective alternative treatment model. We suggest that such therapeutic
management be implemented where suitable.”12
In consideration of implementing PSM strategies
in Canada, there are several points to examine. First,
all RCTs examining PSM involved extensive training,
with nurse clinicians or specialized physicians at tertiary care centres to educate participants in the fundamentals of warfarin therapy and adjustment regimens
and offered patient support. These resources are simply unavailable to Canadian family physicians. Second,
electronic INR testing devices were provided to all
patients, which would cost each patient approximately
$1000 with the additional cost of testing strips. Third,
benefit from PSM implementation in a typical Canadian
setting could be substantial. A Canadian study designed
to examine a more pragmatic method of PSM is clearly
necessary.
In light of this, we conducted a practical open-label
randomized crossover trial using a PSM strategy that
incorporated outpatient laboratory monitoring (rather
than point-of-care devices) and PSM education limited
to 1 office visit. The primary objective was to determine whether a PSM strategy implemented in a typical Canadian family practice clinic could reliably and
consistently maintain therapeutic INR values. We also
sought to determine patient preference for treatment
strategy and to evaluate the feasibility of conducting a
large-scale RCT of similar design.
METHODS
Study design and population
The study was approved by the Ethics Committee at
the University of British Columbia in Vancouver, and
informed written consent was obtained from all participants. Patients were recruited from a private family
practice in British Columbia. All patients receiving warfarin therapy were considered for participation. Inclusion
criteria included age older than 18 years, warfarin therapy that preceded the study for more than 3 months and
that would be expected to continue for the duration of
the study, previous record of compliance with medication, and competence judged by demonstrated ability
to use drug-adjustment nomograms (Table 1). Patients
were excluded on the basis of severe psychiatric disease,
serious language barrier, poor visual acuity, or the primary care physician’s judgment that the patient would
be a poor candidate for the study.
Table 1. “SHEET E” dose-adjustment nomogram for daily 4-mg dose of warfarin (4 pink-coloured pills*)
INR range DOSE ADJUSTMENT follow-up
Below 1.5 Take an extra 5 mg (1 peach-coloured pill*) today AND switch to SHEET G (5 mg/d)
tomorrow
 1 wk
1.5-1.9 Switch to SHEET F (4.5 mg/d) 1 wk
 2.0-3.0 No change 2 wk
3.1-3.9 No change; if still above 3 at follow-up, switch to SHEET D (3.5 mg/d) 1 wk
4.0-5.0 Do not take tomorrow’s dose; switch to SHEET D (3.5 mg/d) 2-5 d
Above 5 Contact doctor’s office
INR—international normalized ratio.
*Warfarin was prescribed to patients in the form of 5-mg (peach-coloured) and 1-mg (pink-coloured) tablets.
Vol 57: August • août 2011 | Canadian Family Physician • Le Médecin de famille canadien e295
Patient self-management of warfarin therapy | Research
An open-label crossover design was used and participants were randomly assigned to 2 groups using computerized random selection. Group A was assigned to
PSM and Group B to physician anticoagulation management (usual care); later, the treatment strategies were
reversed. The duration of each stage (PSM and usual
care) was 4.5 months (126 days).
Patient education and scheduled office visits
A total of 3 scheduled office visits of 15 minutes’ duration took place, with 1 visit allocated for patient education. During the first visit, the consent form and the trial
were discussed. The second visit was used to determine
the patient’s willingness to participate and, if randomized to Group A, to educate the patient briefly on the
fundamentals of anticoagulation therapy and to explain
the strategy of PSM. The study commenced the day of
the second office visit. A third office visit took place midstudy, at which time patients in Group B were educated
in PSM methods and patients in Group A relinquished
their PSM materials.
Patient self-management
All bloodwork was done at community laboratories, which
were unaware of treatment assignments. Arrangements
were made for patients in the PSM group to receive their
INR results either by mail or in person. A PSM binder
given to each patient included a simple instruction page, a
progress chart, and warfarin dose-adjustment nomograms
for 5 different doses (Figure 113). Nomograms instructed
patients which dose to switch to if necessary and when to
retest their blood. The investigators did not contact PSM
participants to ensure they were changing doses properly
or at the correct times. Warfarin was prescribed to patients
in the form of 5-mg (peach-coloured) and 1-mg (pinkcoloured) tablets. Patients were instructed to contact the
office by phone or in person any time they were having difficulty with the PSM or if their INR value exceeded 5.
Figure 1. CONSORT13 ow diagram
ENROLMENT
Allocation
Assessed for eligibility (n=32)
Randomized (n=11)
Excluded (n=21)
• Did not meet inclusion criteria (n=19)
• Declined to participate (n=2)
Follow-up
and analysis
Allocated to Group A (n=6)
• Received allocated intervention (n=6)
Allocated to Group B (n=5)
• Received allocated intervention (n=5)
Completed follow-up and analysis (n=6) Completed follow-up and analysis (n=5)
CONSORT—Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials.
e296 Canadian Family Physician • Le Médecin de famille canadien | Vol 57: August • août 2011
Research | Patient self-management of warfarin therapy
Outcomes
The primary outcome for effectiveness was the proportion of INR values in the therapeutic range for each management strategy. The number of days in the therapeutic
range was also determined. Feasibility end points included
determination of the proportion of eligible patients consenting, the preferred management strategy of individual
patients at the end of the study, a treatment-related satisfaction survey measuring 5 categories of quality of life,
and additional office visits and phone calls pertaining to
anticoagulation. Categories in the survey included medical treatment satisfaction, self-efficacy, general psychological distress, daily hassles, and strained social network;
the survey was completed by all participants immediately
before and after the PSM phase. This survey has been
used in similar studies and has been validated.2 Safety end
points included hemorrhagic or thromboembolic complications. Major and minor hemorrhages were defined by
the bleeding severity index described by Landefeld et al.14
If it became necessary for patients to suspend their warfarin therapy temporarily during the study, the duration of
time was recorded and INR value recording recommenced
1 week after restarting therapy.
Statistical analysis
Outcomes were analyzed according to intention-to-treat
principles and were conducted using SAS (Statistical
Analysis System), version 9.2. The primary effectiveness
outcome was the proportion of individual INR values
within target range for each subject according to treatment group. To calculate the proportion of time within
target range, initial and final INR results were carried
forward and backward to days 0 and 126, respectively,
and linear interpolation was used. Comparisons were
made using the paired t test for both the proportion
of INR results within range and when comparing time
spent within the therapeutic INR range. These methods have been used in similar trials previously.2,4,7,8,10 For
the secondary outcome of patient satisfaction, the differences between preintervention and postintervention
scores on 32 individual items and on 5 derived categories were compared using paired t tests. A sign test was
also used to assess whether the number of items showing increased postintervention satisfaction exceeded the
number expected by chance. This feasibility study was
designed to be conducted at a single site over the course
of 9 months; therefore, no formal sample size calculation was performed because all eligible consenting
patients were to be included.
RESULTS
Thirty-two patients were identified, and 13 who fulfilled the
inclusion and exclusion criteria were invited to participate.
Eleven patients agreed to participate and were enrolled
(85%). The mean age of participants was 73 years, and 64%
of participants had no education beyond high school (Table
2). The study observed 99 patient-months of monitoring
and recorded 122 INR measures (Table 3). When comparing
the mean proportion of INR values in the therapeutic range
among the 2 groups, there was a non-significant difference
of 2.2% (95% confidence interval 19.1 to 23.6) favouring
PSM (P=.82), with values for PSM and usual care of 82.4%
and 80.2%, respectively. A non-significant difference was
also found comparing the number of days in therapeutic
range per patient using PSM and usual care (P=.76), with
results of 82.2% and 79.7%, respectively (Figure 2).
Table 2. Participant characteristics
PARTICIPANT CHARACTERISTICS
GROUP A
(N=6)
GROUP B
(N=5)
TOTAL
(N=11)
Mean age, y 67.7 77.8 72.3
Sex, male:female 4:2 4:1 8:3
Indications for anticoagulation, n
• Atrial fibrillation 2 3 5
• Venous thromboembolism 3 2 5
• Prosthetic heart valve 1 1 2
Target INR range, n
• 2.0-3.0 5 4 9
• 2.5-3.5 1 1 2
Highest level of education, n
• Did not complete high school 1 3 4
• High school 2 1 3
• Attended college or trade
school 1 1 2
• Attended university 2 0 2
INR—international normalized ratio.
Table 3. Results
TREATMENT MEASURES PSM USUAL CARE P VALUE
INR values in range,* n 52.0 43.0 .82
• Mean proportion of
values, % 82.4 80.2
• Total values 64.0 58.0
Days in therapeutic range† 1176.0 1071.0 .76
• Proportion of days in
range, % 82.2 79.7
• Total days 1386.0 1344.0
• Omitted days 42.0 0
INR—international normalized ratio, PSM—patient self-management.
*Out of a recorded 122 INR measures.
†
Out of 99 patient-months.
Vol 57: August • août 2011 | Canadian Family Physician • Le Médecin de famille canadien e297
Patient self-management of warfarin therapy | Research
Patient preference for warfarin management strategy was identified at the final office visit on the last day
of the study. Ten participants (91%) identified preference
for PSM and were invited to continue with this strategy.
One participant (9%) elected to continue with physician
management (P=.001). There were no statistical differences in any of the categories of the quality-of-life survey when comparing PSM with usual care.
No additional office visits or phone support were
required to assist patients in PSM. There were no thromboembolic complications, suggesting good protocol
adherence and comfort. One episode of self-limited
bleeding, defined as minor, occurred in 1 patient during
the PSM phase. During the PSM phase, 2 patients suspended warfarin therapy for a total of 35 patient-days
(1% of the total patient-days) to undergo procedures.
DISCUSSION
Warfarin therapy has been shown to decrease the risk
of complications in thrombogenic conditions, although
control of this drug in the therapeutic range is a serious
challenge. Patient self-management has proven to be an
effective strategy, but typical implementation methods
are not feasible in Canadian primary care practices. In
our study we have shown that a simple PSM strategy in
a typical primary care practice with no additional resources is feasible and was preferred by patients; however,
we cannot conclude its superiority or noninferiority to
standard care with respect to INR control. This study justifies a large trial of similar design and has demonstrated
the feasibility of conducting such a trial in a communitybased setting as measured by high consent, established
preference by patients, and minimal need for primary
care physicians’ involvement during the study.
In this study the proportion of days in the therapeutic
range for PSM and usual care were 82.2% and 79.7%,
respectively. These proportions are higher than either
PSM in large clinical trials (72%)1 or usual care in primary care clinics (50%).1 A 6-month quality assessment
of randomly selected patients taking warfarin in the
study clinic (conducted before this study) showed that
80% of days were within the target INR (unpublished
data). This suggests that management of the usual care
group was not influenced by the study.
There were 2 significant differences between our
study and large RCTs examining PSM. First, patient
education occurred during a single 15-minute office
visit rather than several extensive training sessions at
a tertiary care centre, which were standard in other
RCTs.2,4,6-8,10,15 We believe that our simple instructional
5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
DAYS
INR*
Figure 2. Scatter data plot of INR values among patients in the PSM and usual care groups
PSM
Usual care
INR—international normalized ratio, PSM—patient self-management.
*Therapeutic target range 2.0 to 3.0.
e298 Canadian Family Physician • Le Médecin de famille canadien | Vol 57: August • août 2011
Research | Patient self-management of warfarin therapy
method was adequate, as there were no requests for
assistance with PSM despite a strong emphasis during
the study that patients were to call or visit the office in
the event of any confusion. The mean age of the patient
population in this study was similar to published values for populations receiving warfarin therapy,16 and the
level of education was likely not above average for this
age group (Table 1).
Second, INR values were obtained through community laboratory testing rather than point-of-care devices.
Patients received their results either in person or through
the mail. Some difficulty was experienced in dealing with
the public hospital laboratory, as mailings to patients
were in a few instances delayed or not sent, requiring study investigators to contact laboratory management. This was in contrast to the local private laboratory
in which there were no administrative errors. Patients’
unimpeded access to their INR results would be critical in
any future applications of this management strategy.
We found no statistical difference in general patient
satisfaction between the PSM and the usual care groups.
This is in contrast to 2 previous studies using the same
survey. One study reported statistical improvement in all
5 categories10 and a second in 4 categories.2 Our study
was likely underpowered to detect these differences.
This study is subject to several limitations. First is
a lack of external validity, as only 1 practice was used
in patient recruitment. This is more likely to affect the
usual care group in which physician variability in INRbased warfarin dosing is to be expected, rather than the
PSM group, which used a standard dosing algorithm.
Second, the inclusion and exclusion criteria involved
considerable subjectivity; however, this is typical in similar research and more robust criteria do not currently
exist. This study was not designed to determine the criteria for PSM patient selection. Physicians wishing to
implement a PSM strategy should monitor use before
allowing patient independence to ensure only appropriate patients are selected. Finally, our relatively small
sample size limited our ability to determine possible
statistical significance. The use of a crossover design,
however, was a substantial strength of this small trial,
as it was able to control for differences between groups
because subjects acted as their own controls.
Conclusion
We attempted to assess the feasibility and effectiveness
of implementing a PSM strategy for patients using warfarin therapy in a real-world Canadian primary care setting, using community laboratories and comparatively
little training. We have found that, for appropriately
selected patients, this strategy is effective in maintaining
therapeutic INR values and is the strategy patients find
most desirable. This study established the feasibility
of implementing a fully powered study to assess the
effectiveness of a simple and pragmatic PSM intervention in Canadian primary care. The results of this study
demonstrated neither superiority nor noninferiority of
PSM compared with usual care, although it was not
powered to detect such a difference.
Dr Grunau is a resident in the Department of Family Medicine and the
Department of Emergency Medicine at the University of British Columbia
(UBC) in Vancouver. Dr Wiens is Pharmacotherapeutic Specialist at Chilliwack
General Hospital in British Columbia and is a research fellow in the School of
Population and Public Health at UBC. Dr Harder is Clinical Assistant Professor
in the Department of Family Medicine at UBC.
Acknowledgment
We thank Dr Jonathan Berkowitz for his help with the statistical analysis and
Dr Lori Laughland, a resident research supervisor at the University of British
Columbia in Vancouver.
Contributors
Dr Grunau contributed to the study conception and literature review, design,
ethics proposal, and intervention implementation, and was the primary manuscript author. Dr Wiens contributed to the study design, statistical analysis, and
manuscript revisions. Dr Harder contributed to the study conception, implementation, and manuscript review.
Competing interests
None declared
Correspondence
Dr Brian Grunau, St Paul’s Hospital Emergency Department, 1081 Burrard St,
Vancouver, BC V6Z 1Y6; e-mail briangrunau@gmail.com
References
1. Van Walraven C, Jennings A, Oake N, Fergusson D, Forster AJ. Effect of study
setting on anticoagulation control: a systematic review and metaregression.
Chest 2006;129(5):1155-66.
2. Sawicki PT. A structured teaching and self-management program for patients
receiving oral anticoagulation: a randomized controlled trial. working group
for the study of patient self-management of oral anticoagulation. JAMA
1999;281(2):145-50.
3. Körtke H, Körfer R. International normalized ratio self-management after mechanical heart valve replacement: is an early start advantageous? Ann Thorac Surg
2001;72(1):44-8.
4. Sidhu P, O’Kane HO. Self-managed anticoagulation: results from a twoyear prospective randomized trial with heart valve patients. Ann Thorac Surg
2001;72(5):1523-7.
5. Völler H, Glatz J, Taborski U, Bernardo A, Dovifat C, Heidinger K. Selfmanagement of oral anticoagulation in nonvalvular atrial fibrillation (SMAAF
study). Z Kardiol 2005;94(3):182-6.
6. Watzke HH, Forberg E, Svolba G, Jimenez-Boj E, Krinninger B. A prospective
controlled trial comparing weekly self-testing and self-dosing with the standard management of patients on stable oral anticoagulation. Thromb Haemost
2000;83(5):661-5.
7. Khan TI, Kamali F, Kesteven P, Avery P, Wynne H. The value of education and
self-monitoring in the management of warfarin therapy in older patients with
unstable control of anticoagulation. Br J Haematol 2004;126(4):557-64.
8. Menéndez-Jándula B, Souto JC, Oliver A, Montserrat I, Quintana M, Gich I, et al.
Comparing self-management of oral anticoagulant therapy with clinic management: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 2005;142(1):1-10.
9. Heneghan C, Alonso-Coello P, Garcia-Alamino JM, Perera R, Meats E, Glasziou P.
Self-monitoring of oral anticoagulation: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Lancet 2006;367(9508):404-11.
10. Cromheecke ME, Levi M, Colly LP, de Mol BJ, Prins MH, Hutten BA, et al. Oral
anticoagulation self-management and management by a specialist anticoagulation clinic: a randomised cross-over comparison. Lancet 2000;356(9224):97-102.
11. Regier DA, Sunderji R, Lynd LD, Gin K, Marra CA. Cost-effectiveness of selfmanaged versus physician-managed oral anticoagulation therapy. CMAJ
2006;174(13):1847-52.
12. Ansell J, Hirsh J, Hylek E, Jacobson A, Crowther M, Palareti G, et al.
Pharmacology and management of the vitamin K antagonists: American College
of Chest Physicians evidence-based clinical practice guidelines (8th edition).
Chest 2008;133(6 Suppl):160S-98S.
13. Schulz KF, Altman DG, Moher D; CONSORT Group. CONSORT 2010 statement: updated guidelines for reporting parallel group randomised trials. Trials
2010;11:32.
14. Landefeld CS, Anderson PA, Goodnough LT, Moir TW, Hom DL, Rosenblatt MW,
et al. The bleeding severity index: validation and comparison to other methods for classifying bleeding complications of medical therapy. J Clin Epidemiol
1989;42(8):711-8.
15. Sunderji R, Gin K, Shalansky K, Carter C, Chambers K, Davies C, et al. A randomized trial of patient self-managed versus physician-managed oral anticoagulation. Can J Cardiol 2004;20(11):1117-23.
16. Houston DS, Black C, Metge S. The epidemiology of warfarin use in the population of Manitoba, Canada. Thromb Haemost 2001;86(Suppl 1):OC195.