Annals of Oncology 13: 789–795, 2002 Original article DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdf134
© 2002 European Society for Medical Oncology
Urate-oxidase in the prevention and treatment of metabolic
complications in patients with B-cell lymphoma and leukemia,
treated in the Société Française d’Oncologie Pédiatrique
LMB89 protocol
C. Patte1
*, C. Sakiroglu1
, S. Ansoborlo2
, A. Baruchel3
, E. Plouvier4
, H. Pacquement5
 &
A. Babin-Boilletot6
On behalf of the Société Française d’Oncologie Pédiatrique†
*Correspondence to: Dr C. Patte, Institut Gustave Roussy,
39 rue Camille Desmoulins, 94805 Villejuif Cedex, France.
Tel: +33-1-42-11-41-76; Fax: +33-1-42-11-52-75; E-mail: patte@igr.fr
†Listed in the Acknowledgements.
1
Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, 2
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Bordeaux; 3
Hôpital St Louis, Paris; 4
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Besançon; 5
Institut Curie, Paris; 6
Institut de Puériculture, Strasbourg, France
Received 14 May 2001; revised 7 December 2001; accepted 12 December 2001
Purpose: To evaluate the frequency of metabolic complications and dialysis due to tumor lysis
syndrome in patients with B-cell advanced-stage non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL) and L3 leukemia at
initiation of chemotherapy including the use of urate-oxidase.
Patients and methods: Retrospective review of the clinical records of 410 patients with stage III and
IV B-cell NHL and L3 leukemia treated in France and prospectively registered in the LMB89 protocol.
Results: During the first week of chemotherapy, only 34 of 410 patients recorded metabolic problems
that included hypocalcemia (<70 mg/dl) in 24 patients, hyperphosphatemia (>6.5 mg/dl) in 28 and
elevation of creatinine ≥2 SD in 16. Six patients underwent dialysis for life-threatening problems and a
seventh as a preventive measure. In the other 27 cases, metabolic problems were successfully resolved
using urate-oxidase in combination with alkaline hyperhydration. Among the 410 patients, one case of
hemolysis was reported and there was no severe allergic reaction to urate-oxidase.
Conclusions: Only 1.7% of patients in our study receiving urate-oxidase during their induction chemotherapy needed renal dialysis. Urate-oxidase was well tolerated, and used as prophylaxis and/or treatment of hyperuricemia and tumor lysis syndrome consistently gave a lower rate of renal and metabolic
complications than in other series of similar patients.
Key words: B-cell lymphoma, hyperuricemia, L3 leukemia, LMB protocol, tumor lysis syndrome,
urate-oxidase
Introduction
Lymphoproliferative malignancies are frequently associated
with acute tumor lysis syndrome (TLS), a massive spontaneous or chemotherapy-induced cytolysis leading to the release
of intracellular metabolites [1, 2]. The resulting metabolic
disturbances cause significant clinical problems. In particular,
hyperuricemia resulting from the breakdown of large quantities of nucleic acids in the lysed tumor cells [3] has been
implicated in the eventual development of renal dysfunction,
as precipitation of uric acid leading to intraluminal tubular
obstruction results in acute renal failure [4]. Although the
prognosis for patients with B-cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
(NHL) and L3 acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) who
survive disease-free for 1 year is now generally excellent,
these metabolic problems can have a major deleterious impact
on morbidity and mortality.
For many years the standard pharmacological treatment for
hyperuricemia has been allopurinol, which blocks the metabolic conversion of hypoxanthine and xanthine to uric acid
[5, 6]. Allopurinol also inhibits de novo purine synthesis,
further lowering uric acid concentrations. Although effective,
allopurinol treatment has some limitations. Allopurinol
administration prevents further synthesis of uric acid but does
not degrade the uric acid already present, and is therefore usually given together with alkaline hyperdiuresis to clear renal
uric acid crystals, a process that takes up to 10 days and which
790
might significantly delay the start of chemotherapy. Since
xanthine and hypoxanthine are themselves only slightly soluble, their accumulation may be toxic [7–9]. Furthermore,
allopurinol inhibits the degradation of the chemotherapeutic
agents 6-mercaptopurine and azathioprine, increasing their
chemotoxicity and complicating their simultaneous administration in chemotherapeutic regimens [3].
As a result of allopurinol’s disadvantages, the enzyme
urate-oxidase has been developed as an alternative to catalyze
the conversion of uric acid to more soluble allantoin (Figure 1).
Urate-oxidase is present in many mammals (excluding
humans and other primates), and because it acts at the end of
the purine metabolic pathway it does not lead to the accumulation of intermediary metabolites such as xanthine, thus limiting the risk of renal damage [10]. Urate-oxidase extracted
from Aspergillus sp. has been available as Uricozyme in
France since 1975 [11–13] and in Italy since 1984 [10, 14],
and has been routinely used in these countries for the prophylaxis or treatment of severe hyperuricemia following chemotherapy. More recently a recombinant version using the gene
cloned from Aspergillus sp. has become available [15].
Little has yet been published to support the clinical use of
urate-oxidase in the prophylaxis and treatment of malignancyassociated hyperuricemia and TLS [11–14]. The study
reported here retrospectively evaluated the frequency of metabolic complications and dialysis in patients with B-cell NHL
and L3 ALL who had undergone chemotherapy in France
according to the LMB89 protocol [16] including the use of
urate-oxidase. A secondary aim of the study was to compare
these results with those of similar patients treated with the
same (as in the UK) or similar (in other countries) protocols,
all without the concomitant use of urate-oxidase.
Patients and methods
Patients
This study is a retrospective evaluation of early renal and metabolic
complications and of the effect of urate-oxidase on patients with B-cell
NHL or L3 ALL treated with the LMB89 protocol (July 1989 to May
1996). This protocol followed previous LMB protocols for the treatment
of B-cell malignancies in use in France and in some Dutch and Belgian
centers since 1981 [17, 18]. In all these protocols, chemotherapy started
with a 1-week cytoreductive low-dose regimen (COP) using vincristine
(VCR) 1 mg/m2
 and cyclophosphamide (CPM) 300 mg/m2
 on day 1, with
7 days of prednisone 60 mg/m2
 and intrathecal treatment [one dose of
methotrexate (MTX) and hydrocortisone for stage III and for central
nervous system (CNS)-negative stage IV NHL, or three doses of MTX,
cytarabine and hydrocortisone for CNS-positive stage IV NHL or for
B-cell ALL]. The first intensive induction course of chemotherapy,
COPADM1 [combination of fractionated CPM, VCR, prednisone, Adriamycin and high-dose (HD) MTX (3 g/m2
 in stage III and CNS-negative
stage IV, 8 g/m2
 in CNS-positive NHL and in B-ALL)], started on day 8.
The metabolic problems due to TLS that may have been present before the
start of chemotherapy, and otherwise arose during the first week of treatment, needed to be resolved before COPADM1 could be started.
The current recommendations for the management of TLS are:
(i) alkaline hyperhydration (3 l/m2
/day) to obtain a urine output of about
100–120 ml/m2
/h and urine pH 7; (ii) urate-oxidase given intravenously
over 15–30 min at a dosage of 50–100 U/kg/day (the larger dose is given
in cases of large tumor mass). These recommendations must be initiated
as soon as the diagnosis of NHL or leukemia is suspected and continued as
long as there is a risk of TLS, generally over the 5–7 days following the
start of treatment.
The COP chemotherapy was started only when correct diuresis was
achieved, with furosemide if necessary. In the case of urinary tract
obstruction by tumor mass, temporary urine diversion by percutaneous
nephrostomy or uretera-endoprothesis could be carried out; if these
techniques were not immediately available, dialysis was chosen.
In cases of known large tumor mass, it was possible to split COP
administration over 2 days in an attempt to reduce the acute complications
of TLS, and the dose of urate-oxidase could be increased according to the
plasma uric acid level.
Study design
Of the patients registered in the LMB89 study, the following were
excluded from this investigation: those who were not treated in France
and therefore did not receive urate-oxidase, and those who presented with
stage I and II disease and were therefore at lower risk of TLS. For the
selected patients, i.e. those with stage III and IV NHL or with ALL,
treated in France, the clinical records were reviewed for data on: (i) patient
characteristics (age, sex, weight); (ii) NHL and ALL characteristics
[histology, primary site, other sites especially kidney involvement, serum
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level, stage according to Murphy’s classification]; (iii) presence of ‘associated problems’ before the start of treatment (general comments on renal function or other physiological data,
without specific documentation); and (iv) occurrence of significant metabolic problems during the first week of treatment. The patients whose
records noted the occurrence of metabolic problems during the first week
of chemotherapy were selected for detailed analysis. A questionnaire was
completed using the information from the patients’ case report forms on
renal function, electrolyte balance [serum phosphate levels >2.1 mmol/l
(6.5 mg/dl), calcium <1.75 mmol/l (70 mg/l), potassium >6.5 mmol/l],
initial and highest serum uric acid level, urate-oxidase dose, clinical
management, need for dialysis and problems during the first COPADM
course, especially delay in HD MTX excretion.
Renal function impairment was defined as a serum creatinine level
>2 standard deviations (SD) above the normal value for the patient’s age,
as given by the Schwartz formula [19].
Figure 1. Diagram of the purine catabolism pathway. *Uric acid is the
normal end point in humans.
791
Statistical methodology
The results of the retrospective study were tabulated and displayed using
descriptive statistics only.
Results
Study patients
The records of 410 patients with B-cell stage III and IV NHL
and ALL, treated in 37 French centers, were reviewed. Some
of the characteristics of this group of patients are shown in
Table 1. LDH levels raised to over twice the institutional
upper normal level were found in 234 patients (57%), indicative of a heavy tumor burden. A large number of the patients
had ascites (45%), pleural effusion (20%) or kidney involvement (14%).
Initial clinical problems with metabolic or renal disorders
and/or urinary tract dysfunction before the start of any chemotherapy were recorded in 41 patients, some of them occurring
in the same patient. Renal failure was recorded 21 times (5%);
urinary tract obstruction nine times (2%), leading to percutaneous pyelostomy in two patients, vesical catheter in two, double
J ureteral catheter in one and a single dialysis course in one
patient; major electrolyte imbalance seven times (2%, two
patients with hypercalcemia, three with hyperkaliemia, two
with hyperphosphatemia); paraplegia or spina bifida three
times (0.7%); and ureteral fistula once.
All the patients received COP chemotherapy in combination with the measures recommended for the management of
TLS. Only 11 of those with recorded initial metabolic problems and 23 others presented significant metabolic problems
during the first week after the start of treatment.
Patients presenting metabolic problems after start of
chemotherapy
Description at diagnosis
In the first week after the start of chemotherapy, i.e. during
the cytoreductive low-dose phase of COP treatment, 34 of
410 patients with metabolic problems were recorded: six girls
and 28 boys with ages ranging from 3 to 15 years, and weight
from 15.6 to 63 kg. Some of their demographic and baseline
characteristics are shown in Table 2. Twenty-two patients had
an abdominal and one a maxillary tumor as the primary site,
and 11 had ALL. Twenty patients (59%) presented with
puncturable ascites, 17 with pleural effusion and 13 with
kidney tumor involvement. All but one patient had LDH levels
more than twice the normal value, and 13 patients (38%) had
levels more than 10 times the normal value; the median LDH
level was seven times the normal value. Eight were recorded
as having renal insufficiency at diagnosis. After review of the
questionnaire, three of these were found to have had creatinine
levels <2 SD above the norm and 11 other patients, i.e. a total
of 16, already had impaired renal function before the start of
COP, including five with oligo-anuria, five with hydronephrosis and six with diffuse kidney tumor involvement.
Table 1. Baseline characteristics of patients included in study
No. of patients (%)
Patients eligible for inclusion in the present study 410
Disease status
Stage III 257 (63%)
Stage IV 57 (14%)
L3 acute lymphocytic leukemia 96 (23%)
Lactate dehydrogenase
<2 × normal 145 (35%)
≥2 × normal 234 (57%)
Unknown 31 (7.6%)
Pleural effusion 83 (20%)
Ascites 183 (45%)
Kidney involvement 56 (14%)
Problems reported before start of chemotherapy
Renal failure 21 (5%)
Urinary tract obstruction with renal failure 9 (2%)
Paraplegia or spina bifida 3 (0.7%)
Major electrolyte imbalance 7 (2%)
Table 2. Demographic and baseline characteristics of patients with
recorded metabolic disorders in the first week of chemotherapy
No. of patients (%)
Total patients with recorded metabolic disorders 34
Disease status
Stage III 11
Stage IV 5
Acute lymphocytic leukemia 18
Lactate dehydrogenase
>2 × normal 33
>10 × normal 13
Median 7 × normal
Uric acid (22 patients)
Median 807 µmol/l
Range 50–1800 µmol/l
Pleural effusion 17 (50%)
Ascites 20 (59%)
Impaired renal function
Elevated creatinine (>2 SD for the age) 16
Oliguria 5
Hydronephrosis 5
Renal tumor involvement 13
792
As uric acid dosage were not available for any time in any
center, and because urate-oxidase and hyperhydration were
generally initiated immediately on admission of the patient,
the initial uric acid level was not known for nine patients and
was uncertain in a further two. The other 22 patients showed
elevated uric acid levels between 506 and 1800 µmol/l (5.7
and 20.3 mg/dl) with a median of 807 µmol/l (9.1 mg/dl).
In 11 patients, the COP course was split over more than 1 day.
Metabolic problems after the start of chemotherapy
For these 34 patients, a diverse combination of metabolic
problems after the start of chemotherapy were reported.
Hypocalcemia <1.75 mmol/l (70 mg/dl) was reported in
24 patients (72%), hyperphosphatemia >2.1 mmol/l (6.5 mg/dl)
in 28 patients (85%), and creatininemia ≥2 SD above the norm
in 16 patients (47%) (10 in whom it was already recognized
and six others). In 21 of the patients the metabolic problems
were classified as severe: hyperphosphatemia >3 µmol/l
(9.3 mg/dl) in 16 and oliguria or anuria in six and two patients,
respectively. Twelve of these cases had life-threatening problems, with levels of phosphate >5 µmol/ml (15.5 mg/dl) in
four patients, of potassium ≥6.5 mmol/l in five patients, and
oliguria or anuria in patients as previously noted.
Six of the 12 patients with life-threatening problems underwent dialysis: four for oliguria or anuria (associated with hyperphosphatemia in two cases), and two for hyperphosphatemia
(associated with hyperkalemia in one patient). Two of these
patients initially showed either kidney tumor involvement or
renal insufficiency, and four patients had a combination of
both problems. In one further case, dialysis was instigated as a
preventive measure due to the patient’s poor condition (renal
insufficiency, staphylococcal septicemia and respiratory
problems due to huge ascites and pleural effusion, but without
oliguria or electrolyte imbalance).
The median number of dialysis courses was three (range
two to five). The patients who received dialysis were aged
between 4 and 15 years. Five presented with large abdominal
tumors (three at stage III, one at stage IV and one ALL) and
two with L3 ALL. Their median LDH levels were eight times
the upper normal limit (range two to 22 times).
In the other 27 cases of patients encountering metabolic
problems (including six where they were life-threatening and
who did not undergo dialysis), the problems were successfully
resolved by treatment using urate-oxidase in combination with
alkaline hyperhydration, and hyperdiuresis with furosemide.
No patients died.
The data review did not investigate the rate at which uric
acid levels decreased, only the highest uric acid level achieved
and the highest daily dose of urate-oxidase used. Eighteen
patients showed good control of uric acid levels [<480 µmol/l
(7.65 mg/dl)] on a median urate-oxidase dose of 165 U/kg/day
(range 66–375). Conversely, 16 patients whose median dose
was only 70 U/kg/day (range 30–105) showed inadequate
control of uric acid levels (>480 µmol/l).
Subsequent chemotherapy course
Among the 34 patients, four (two dialyzed, one with severe
metabolic problems but not dialyzed, one without severe metabolic problems but requiring assisted ventilation for 3 days in
an intensive care unit) presented delayed excretion of HD
MTX given at 8 g/m2
 during the first COPADM course. This
was followed by grade 4 mucositis in four patients, severe
aplasia with sepsis in two patients, and numerous transfusions
required by a further two patients. No patients died.
Safety of urate-oxidase
In this series of 410 patients there was only one case of
hemolysis in a patient with a previously undetected glucose
6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency. After stopping urate-oxidase treatment the hemolysis was managed
without any further difficulty. No severe allergic reactions
were reported from these patients. No data are available on the
development of antibodies to urate-oxidase over time. In
31 patients, however, there was subsequent tumor regrowth,
relapse or development of secondary hematological malignancy requiring further urate-oxidase treatment, with no
reports of significant immunological reaction.
Discussion
Out of a total 410 patients in the LMB89 series with stage III
or IV B-cell lymphoma or ALL, only 34 (8%) had reports of
metabolic problems after the start of chemotherapy, 21 (5%)
displayed severe metabolic problems, of which 12 (2.9%)
were life-threatening, and only seven (1.7% of all the study
patients, 0.7% of patients in stage III and 2.6% of patients in
stage IV and with ALL) required dialysis as a result of TLS. It
should be noted that some patients were successfully treated
without dialysis on the standard urate-oxidase-containing
regimen even though they showed the same clinical changes,
including alteration of renal function, oliguria, hyperphosphatemia and hyperkalemia, that led to the implementation of
dialysis in other patients. No patient died as a consequence of
metabolic problems or further problems related to renal function impairment.
These efficacy data may be compared with the data from
published United Kingdom Children Cancer Study Group
(CCSG) and USA Pediatric Oncology Group studies [20–22].
No metabolic data are given in the report of 112 patients with
stage III and CNS-negative stage IV treated with the
UKCCSG9002 protocol identical to the LMB89 group B
protocol [19]. In the series treated with the UKCCSG9003
protocol identical to the LMB89 group C protocol, however,
of 63 patients with CNS-positive stage IV and ALL, 10 (16%)
required dialysis [21]. Five of them subsequently died of
toxicity (infection with or without renal failure). Furthermore,
COPADM first or second courses had to be delayed or modified for 28 patients because of poor clinical condition or
793
associated complications, mainly infectious or metabolic. Of
these 28 patients, seven relapsed and four died from toxicity.
These data underline the improvement in long-term survival
with prevention of renal damage during chemotherapy.
The study from the USA [22], which used an initially more
aggressive chemotherapy regimen, i.e. without a low-dose
cytoreductive phase, showed a nine-fold higher recourse to
dialysis compared with the data reported here (Table 3). Treatment of 123 patients with stage IV small non-cleaved cell
NHL or B-cell ALL showed that early renal and metabolic
dysfunction led to a requirement for dialysis in 28 patients
(23%). Six patients died from metabolic problems.
Thus, compared with 11% and 23% of children with stage IV
NHL and ALL in protocols using chemotherapy and allopurinol, without urate-oxidase, in our series only 2.6% of similar
patients receiving chemotherapy plus urate-oxidase needed
renal dialysis. Although there might be differences in the indications for dialysis in different studies, these results suggest
that urate-oxidase results in better management of metabolic
and renal complications.
The potential impact of the increased use of urate-oxidase in
patients with lymphoid malignancies at risk of TLS is emphasized by a retrospective analysis of 1192 children diagnosed
with NHL of any stage [23], in which 63 patients (5%) were
reported to have suffered from impaired renal function and/or
TLS either before or during the initial treatment. Dialysis was
necessary for 25 patients (40% of all patients with impaired
renal function) and a total of nine patients (14%) died after the
first course of chemotherapy due to sepsis (seven patients) or
electrolyte imbalances (two patients). The authors of this
paper note that patients at advanced stages of the disease and
with a large tumor mass are at high risk of renal failure, and
that the prophylactic use of urate-oxidase in patients with
advanced-stage NHL might reduce the incidence of TLS.
Our retrospective data show that good control of hyperuricemia [<480 µmol/l (7.65 mg/dl)] was achieved on a median
urate-oxidase dose of 165 U/kg/day. Lower dosages (median
70 U/kg/day) gave inadequate control (uric acid >480 µmol/l).
Clinical experience showed that dosage must be adjusted in
line with the observed serum uric acid level. In patients with a
known large tumor mass, the dosage may need to be increased
substantially above the recommended dose of 100 U/kg/day in
order to obtain full efficacy. Clinical practice has shown that
the decrease in uric acid levels is obtained rapidly, although
the present study cannot provide data to support this. Pui et al.,
1997 [24] showed in eight patients with B-ALL or advancedstage B-NHL that plasma uric acid levels were <1 mg/dl
(88 µmol/l) after 4 days of treatment with urate-oxidase
Urate-oxidase was well tolerated in the series of patients
reported here, with one case of hemolysis revealing a previously unknown G6PD deficiency, and with no hypersensitivity reaction. Previous studies with urate-oxidase have reported
varying rates of allergic reactions, from 0% to 4.5% [24],
reflecting differences in the underlying allergic status of the
patients involved.
This retrospective study was not designed to evaluate
pharmacoeconomics benefits of urate-oxidase or to collect
treatment-related costs. The low incidence of dialysis, of
metabolic complications and toxicity-related deaths, however,
when compared with similar cohorts of patients not receiving
urate-oxidase, may suggest a pharmacoeconomic benefit of
the use of this drug in the described patient population.
From our experience in pediatric hemato-oncology, we
could propose the following guidelines for an optimal use of
urate-oxidase: patients with very high risk of TLS [i.e. patients
with ALL or myeloblastic leukemia with a white blood cell
(WBC) count >100000/mm3
; patients with stage III/IV
Burkitt lymphoma and increased LDH level and/or high uric
acid level, renal involvement and impaired renal function;
patients with L3 leukemia; patients with stage III/IV lymphoblastic lymphoma and a significant tumor mass (>10 cm)
and/or pleural effusion and impaired renal function] will
systematically be treated with urate-oxidase. Urate-oxidase in
these cases will be started before initiation of chemotherapy
and given as long as tumor lysis persists, for a duration of
5–7 days under chemotherapy. In cases where tumor lysis is
very intense (during the first 3 days of chemotherapy) the
number of daily injections may be increased, according to the
plasma uric acid levels and to the other biological parameters.
The use of urate-oxidase should also be closely considered in
the following patients: patients with acute leukemia and WBC
count between 50000 and 100000/mm3
 and/or extensive
tumor mass, high uric acid level, renal involvement, impaired
renal function or high proliferation index, as well as patients
with other stage III/IV Burkitt and lymphoblastic lymphoma.
Urate-oxidase should be avoided in patients with G6PD
Table 3. Comparison of chemotherapy studies with/without urate-oxidase
a
UKCCSG, United Kingdom Children Cancer Study Group. Data from Atra et al. [21].
b
POG, Pediatric Oncology Group. Data from Bowman et al. [22].
ALL, acute lymphocytic leukemia.
LMB89 (France) UKCCSG (UK)a POG (USA)b
Disease stages included III + IV + ALL IV + ALL IV + ALL IV + ALL
Patient number 410 152 63 123
Patients receiving dialysis 7 (1.7%) 4 (2.6%) 10 (16%) 28 (23%)
794
deficiency and given with caution in patients with history of
severe allergies.
A recombinant urate-oxidase (rasburicase; Fasturtec®) has
recently been approved in Europe for the prevention and treatment of acute hyperuricemia in patients with hematological
malignancies. Recombinant DNA techniques result in a welldefined product of higher purity compared with the enzyme
extracted from Aspergillus flavus used in Uricozyme®, potentially translating into a reduced risk of allergic reactions.
Conclusion
The retrospective study reported here shows that urateoxidase in the prophylaxis and treatment of hyperuricemia and
TLS in patients with B-cell ALL or advanced lymphoma consistently leads to a low rate of metabolic and renal complications and recourse to dialysis. Using this treatment regimen,
many patients who would normally be considered at high risk
of TLS showed no symptoms of it, nor of hyperuricemia. The
ability of urate-oxidase to prevent the delays that are caused
by hyperuricemia or impaired renal function represents a
major clinical advantage, since the rapid continuation or
resumption of chemotherapy is of paramount importance in
the treatment of these patients with a high tumor mass. Of the
original 34 patients who showed metabolic problems in this
study, only four experienced delay in continuing chemotherapy. Most of the patients in the study reported here, and in the
UK and USA studies, had excellent prognoses in the absence
of renal complications, so that preservation of renal function is
an important clinical objective in this patient population.
Using urate-oxidase before and during the initial exposure to
cytoreductive therapy may therefore have a two-fold impact
on overall survival in patients with a large tumor burden: first
by its beneficial effect on the renal response to TLS and subsequent need for dialysis, and secondly by allowing patients to
continue or restart chemotherapy more rapidly, a crucial consideration for patients in late-stage disease who are also those
most at risk of TLS.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to P. Rigaudy and J. Leach Scully for
editorial assistance. Sanofi-Synthelabo, Paris, France was the
grant supporter. Participating institutions and investigators:
Institut G. Roussy, Villejuif, Drs Brugieres, Hartmann, Kalifa,
Oberlin, Patte, Pein, Valteau; Institut Curie, Paris, Pr Zucker,
Drs Michon, Doz, Pacquement, Quintana; Hopital Trousseau,
Paris, Pr Leverger, Dr Landmann-Parker; Leon Berard, Lyon,
Dr Frappaz, Pr Philip; Hospices Civils, Strasbourg, Pr Lutz,
Dr Babin Boilletot; Hopital De La Timone, Marseille, Drs
Coze, Gentet; CHU Bordeaux, Drs Perel, Ansoborlo; Hopital
Huriez, Lille, Dr Nelken; Lyon Debrousse, Dr Bertrand,
Pr Philippe; CHU Nantes, Dr Mechinaud; CHU Purpan,
Toulouse, Drs Robert, Rubie; CHRU Nancy, Pr Sommelet, Dr
Schmitt; CHRU Hopital Sud, Rennes, Dr Bergeron, Pr Legall;
Hopital St Louis, Paris, Pr Baruchel, Dr Leblanc; Hopital
C. Nicolle, Rouen, Pr Vannier; CHU, Hopital Lenval, Nice, Pr
Thyss, Drs Deville, Monpoux; Hotel Dieu, Clermont Ferrand,
Pr Demeocq; Hopital Americain, Reims, Drs Behar, Munzer;
Hopital J. Bernard, Poitiers, Dr Millot; CHU Grenoble; Dr
Plantaz; Hopital d’Enfants, Dijon, Dr Couillault; Hopital
Robert Debre, Paris, Pr Vilmer, Dr Rohrlich; Hopital Clocheville, Tours, Pr Lamagnere, Dr Lejars; CHU, Amiens, Dr
Pautard; Hopital St Jacques, Besancon, Dr Plouvier; CHU
Angers, Dr Rialland; CHU, Caen, Dr Boutard; CHU
Dupuytren, Limoges, Pr De Lumley; Hopital Nord De St
Etienne, Dr Stephan; Centre Oscar Lambret, Lille, Drs
Demaille, Baranzelli.
References
1. Warrell RP Jr. Metabolic emergencies. In DeVita VT, Hellman S,
Rosenberg SA (eds): Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott 1993; 2134–2135.
2. Arrambide K, Toto RD. Tumor lysis syndrome. Semin Nephrol 1993;
13: 273–280.
3. Stucky LA. Acute tumor lysis syndrome: assessment and nursing
implications. Oncol Nurs Forum 1993; 20: 49–59.
4. Krakoff IH, Meyer RL. Prevention of hyperuricemia in leukemia and
lymphoma: use of allopurinol, a xanthine oxidase inhibitor. J Am
Med Assoc 1965; 193: 89–94.
5. Hande KR. Allopurinol. In Chabner BA, Collins JM (eds): Cancer
Chemotherapy: Principles and Practice. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
1990; 408–423.
6. DeConti RC, Calabresi P. Use of allopurinol for prevention and
control of hyperuricaemia in patients with neoplastic disease. N Engl
J Med 1966; 274: 481–486.
7. Jones DP, Mahmoud H, Chesney RW. Tumor lysis syndrome: pathogenesis and management. Pediatr Nephrol 1995; 9: 206–212.
8. Band PR, Silverberg DS, Henderson JF et al. Xanthine nephropathy
in a patient with lymphosarcoma treated with allopurinol. N Engl
J Med 1970; 283: 354–357.
9. Mahmoud HH, Leverger G, Patte C et al. Advances in the management of malignancy-associated hyperuricemia. Br J Cancer 1998; 77:
18–20.
10. Masera G, Jankovic M, Zurlo MG et al. Urate-oxidase prophylaxis of
uric acid-induced renal damage in childhood leukemia. J Pediatr
1982; 100: 152–155.
11. Gardais J. L’urate-oxydase dans le traitement des hemopathies
malignes. Quest Med 1976; 29: 1199–1203.
12. Robert A, Corberand J, Regnier CL. Utilisation de l’urate-oxydase
dans la prevention et le traitement des hyperuricemies dans 20 cas de
leucose aigue de l’enfant. Rev Med Toulouse 1976; 12: 1093–1100.
13. Zittoun R, Dauchy F, Teillaud C et al. Le traitement des hyperuricemies en haematologie par l’urate oxydase et l’allopurinol. Ann
Med Interne 1976; 127: 479–482.
14. Jankovic M, Zurlo MG, Rossi E et al. Urate-oxidase as hypouricemic
agent in a case of acute tumor lysis syndrome. Am J Pediatr Hematol
Oncol 1985; 7: 202–204.
15. Pui CH, Mahmoud HH, Wiley JM et al. Recombinant urate oxidase
for the prophylaxis or treatment of hyperuricemia in patients with
leukemia or lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 2001; 19: 697–704.
795
16. Patte C, Auperin A, Michon J et al. The SFOP LMB89 protocol:
highly effective multi-agent chemotherapy tailored to tumor burden
and initial response in 561 unselected children with B-cell lymphoma
and L3 leukemia. Blood 2001; 97: 3370–3379.
17. Patte C, Philip T, Rodary C et al. Improved survival rate in children
with stage III and IV B cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma and leukemia
using multi-agent chemotherapy: results of a study of 114 children
from the French Pediatric Oncology Society. J Clin Oncol 1986; 4:
1219–1226.
18. Patte C, Philip T, Rodary C et al. High survival rate in advanced-stage
B-cell lymphomas and leukemias without CNS involvement with a
short intensive polychemotherapy: results from the French Pediatric
Oncology Society of a randomized trial of 216 children. J Clin Oncol
1991; 9: 123–132.
19. Schwartz GJ. Does kL/PCr estimate GFR, or does GFR determine k?
Pediatr Nephrol 1992; 6: 512–515.
20. Atra A, Imeson JD, Hobson R et al. Improved outcome in children
with advanced stage B-cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (B-NHL):
results of the United Kingdom Children Cancer Study Group
(UKCCSG) 9002 protocol. Br J Cancer 2000; 82: 1396–1402.
21. Atra A, Gerrard M, Hobson R et al. Improved cure rate in children
with B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (B-ALL) and stage IV
B-cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (B-NHL). Results of the UKCCSG
9003 protocol. Br J Cancer 1998; 77: 2281–2285.
22. Bowman WP, Shuster JJ, Cook B et al. Improved survival for
children with B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia and stage IV small
noncleaved-cell lymphoma: a pediatric oncology group study. J Clin
Oncol 1996; 14: 1252–1261.
23. Seidemann K, Meyer U, Jansen P et al. Impaired renal function and
tumor lysis syndrome in pediatric patients with non-Hodgkin’s
lymphoma and B-ALL. Observations from the BFM trials. Klin
Pediatr 1998; 210: 279–284.
24. Pui CH, Relling MV, Lascombes F et al. Urate oxidase in prevention
and treatment of hyperuricemia associated with lymphoid malignancies. Leukemia 1997; 11: 1813–1816.