Non-pharmacologic Interventions for CFS: A Randomized Trial
Leonard A. Jason Æ Susan Torres-Harding Æ Fred Friedberg Æ Katrina Corradi Æ
Mary Gloria Njoku Æ Julie Donalek Æ Nadia Reynolds Æ Molly Brown Æ
Bing Bing Weitner Æ Alfred Rademaker Æ Morris Papernik
Published online: 15 November 2007
 Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2007
Abstract Non-pharmacological behavioral treatments for
CFS have been suggested as promising. These trials have
tested protocols composed of behavioral, cognitive and
cognitive–behavioral interventions but there have been few
efforts to differentially evaluate their outcomes. The primary purpose of the current study was to evaluate the
effectiveness of nurse delivered non-pharmacologic interventions. In the present study, 114 participants diagnosed
with CFS were randomly assigned to four 6-month interventions. The interventions were: cognitive–behavior
therapy, cognitive therapy, anaerobic activity, and a
relaxation control group. The study found that these
interventions led to increases in several areas of functioning, with more consistent changes occurring among those
participants in the cognitive condition. For the 25 variables
in this study, significant change occurred for 28%, 20%,
16%, and 12% of the variables for the cognitive, cognitive
behavior therapy, anaerobic activity, and relaxation conditions, respectively. However, the majority of participants
continued to be diagnosed with CFS following the treatment trial. Implications of these findings are discussed.
Keywords CFS  ME  Non-pharmacologic  Treatment 
Trial  Cognitive–behavior therapy
Cognitive behavior therapy with graded exercise (CBT)
constitutes a non-pharmacologic form of treatment for
chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS). This treatment was featured in an influential review article (Whiting et al., 2001).
CBT encourages participants to consider the role of social
and psychological factors in maintaining symptoms. Using
this approach, individuals with CFS are encouraged to
engage in gradual and consistent increases in activity and
to attempt active strategies in place of activity avoidance
as methods to manage symptoms (Surawy, Hackmann,
Hawton, & Sharpe, 1995). Other components of this
treatment include modifying excessive perfectionism and
self-criticism and maintaining an active problem-solving
approach when coping with interpersonal and occupational
difficulties.
Two randomized controlled trials of CBT (Deale,
Chalder, Marks, & Wessely, 1997; Sharpe et al., 1996)
reported substantial improvements in physical and role
functioning for the majority of treated participants with
CFS. In the Sharpe et al. study (1996), 63% of the subjects
in the CBT condition (versus 20% of the control group)
improved significantly in work status and had considerable
reductions in fatigue severity as well. Similarly, in the
Deale et al. (1997) clinical trial, 70% of CBT completers
(versus 19% of the control group) achieved substantial
improvements in physical and role functioning.
In an effort to generalize these findings within less
specialized settings using newly trained therapists, Prins
L. A. Jason (&)  K. Corradi  M. G. Njoku  J. Donalek 
N. Reynolds  M. Brown
Center for Community Research, DePaul University,
990 W. Fullerton Ave., Chicago, IL 60614, USA
e-mail: ljason@depaul.edu
S. Torres-Harding
Roosevelt University, Chicago, IL, USA
F. Friedberg
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA
B. B. Weitner  A. Rademaker
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA
M. Papernik
Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA
123
J Clin Psychol Med Settings (2007) 14:275–296
DOI 10.1007/s10880-007-9090-7
et al. (2001) found that CBT was more effective than
guided support groups for patients with CFS. However,
when this study was compared to others that employed
more highly skilled therapists, there was a lower percentage of improvement. Severens, Prins, Van Wilt, Van Meer,
and Bleijenberg (2004) also reported that a CBT condition
was less costly and more effective than guided support
groups for patients with CFS. In another intervention study,
Powell, Bentall, Nye, and Edwards (2001) compared four
conditions: two face-to-face CBT treatment sessions; a
similar intervention plus an additional seven sessions by
phone; a third intervention that included nine face-to-face
sessions; and a control condition. No significant differences
were found between the three treatment conditions (69%
achieved a satisfactory outcome in physical functioning),
but participants with CFS receiving any of the treatments
did significantly better than the control group receiving
standardized medical care (among controls, only 6%
achieved a satisfactory outcome).
Despite improvements found in a number of behavioral
intervention studies, other studies have been less successful. A non-randomized CBT group therapy trial
(Bazelmans, Prins, Lulofs, van der Meer, & Bleijenberg,
2005) found improvements in fatigue for patients with
CFS, but higher functional improvements for the waiting
list control condition. Furthermore, physician delivered
CBT for CFS participants has not shown efficacy in two
studies (Huibers et al., 2004; Whitehead & Campion,
2002). The somewhat different aspects of study design in
these trials (i.e., use of a group intervention; physician
therapists) may account for the poor outcomes.
Other non-pharmacological intervention studies have
emphasized the role of aerobic exercise as the primary
intervention. For example, Fulcher and White (1997)
compared graded aerobic exercise to flexibility/relaxation
training and found that patients with CFS in the exercise
group were more likely to rate themselves as ‘‘improved’’
when compared to those in the flexibility/relaxation group
(52% vs. 27%). In a later study, Wearden et al. (1998)
randomly assigned participants with CFS to receive graded
exercise and fluoxetine, graded exercise and a placebo
drug, exercise placebo and fluoxetine, or exercise placebo
and drug placebo. There was an 18% improvement with
aerobic exercise and a 6% improvement with placebo
controls. Edmonds, McGuire, and Price (2004) reviewed
five randomized controlled trials using exercise and concluded that, although some patients with CFS might benefit
from aerobic exercise, these treatments are less acceptable
to patients than other approaches such as rest and pacing.
They concluded that further randomized studies are needed
to determine whether patients who respond to aerobic
exercise interventions maintain their gains over time.
While aerobic programs often involve efforts to increase
levels of aerobic exercise (e.g., walking), anaerobic intervention programs differ in that they reinforce gradual
increases in activity such as stretching and strengthening,
where the goal is to increase a person’s ability to become
more functional (e.g., being able to stretch to reach a
cupboard in the kitchen). Anaerobic programs have not
been formally tested in CFS nor have they been compared
to graded activity or exercise, which carries the possibility
of symptom exacerbation in the view of many patients
(e.g., Clapp et al., 1999). If an anaerobic program is more
acceptable to patients and holds promise for efficacy, then
it would constitute a desirable comparison group to a
standard CBT condition.
Only a few studies have compared the relative effectiveness of CBT and exercise interventions for patients
with CFS. One published study (Ridsdale, Darbishire, &
Seed, 2004) compared two active behavioral interventions,
i.e., CBT and graded exercise therapy. This study randomized a diverse group of fatigued patients to graded
exercise or CBT in primary care. At an 8-month follow-up,
there were no significant differences between the two
conditions. In the USA, Donta et al. (2003) randomly
assigned over 1,000 individuals with multi-symptom illnesses to one of two groups: CBT plus exercise alone or
CBT alone and usual care. There were no significant
differences in the proportion of individuals who reported
an improvement in physical functioning at a one-year follow-up. The reduced effectiveness of this intervention
might have been caused by differences in training and
supervision of therapists or use of a heterogeneous group of
individuals with both CFS and Gulf War Syndrome.
A third approach to CFS non-pharmacological intervention has used a cognitive therapy model. In contrast to
CBT and graded exercise therapy, cognitive therapy (COG)
for patients with CFS is designed to reduce stress and reevaluate maladaptive cognitions which, in principle, might
facilitate pleasurable low effort activities, lead to better
social relationships, and result in a healthier balance
between activity, rest, and leisure. COG might modify the
way stressful circumstances are appraised and diminish the
way negative emotional responses influence immune
dysregulation. Regular relaxation, emotional-regulation
training, and learning more adaptive coping responses
might also decrease negative emotions. Antoni and Weiss
(2003) suggest that these interventions increase a person’s
sense of self-efficacy and control. Further, reductions in
distress can improve immunologic functioning, perhaps in
turn reducing virally associated infections.
In an early study of a narrowly focused cognitively
oriented coping skills intervention, Friedberg and Krupp
(1994) found a near-significant trend towards reduced
depression scores and a significant reduction in maladaptive illness beliefs among patients with CFS. In addition,
276 J Clin Psychol Med Settings (2007) 14:275–296
123
Soderberg and Evengard (2001) found that more than half
of patients experiencing CFS who were provided with
group therapy exhibited improved psychological wellbeing after adjusting their ambitions and improved symptom coping. In one of the few comparative studies,
Ridsdale et al. (2001) found that counseling was as effective as CBT with fatigue patients. Thus, a more generalized
type of psychological intervention, such as cognitive coping skills, may hold promise for patients with CFS.
Given the mixed results for these various cognitive and
behavioral interventions reported above, it is unclear which
type of non-pharmacologic intervention is most effective
for participants with CFS. Understanding how non-pharmacological interventions differentially affect participants
with CFS might provide insights into the pathophysiology
of this illness. This investigation evaluated the differential
effectiveness of a comprehensive cognitive behavioral
treatment with a graded activity component (CBT), a
cognitive therapy treatment (COG), an anaerobic activity
treatment (ACT), and an active relaxation (RELAX)
intervention. This investigation evaluated the relative
effectiveness of these interventions in addressing the
physical and emotional symptoms of CFS and overall
levels of physical functioning.
Method
Participant Recruitment
Participants were recruited from a variety of sources in the
Chicago metropolitan area, including physician referrals.
Information about the non-pharmacologic treatment trial
study was disseminated to medical colleagues through
mailings, phone communication, and invited grand rounds.
In addition, study announcements for new participants
were placed in local newspapers and recruitment offers
were made at local CFS support group meetings. These
efforts were continued throughout the study period until the
target enrollment numbers were achieved. One hundred
and fourteen individuals were recruited and enrolled in the
study.
Of the 114 individuals, 46% were referred by physicians, 34% were recruited by media (e.g., newspapers, TV,
radio), and 20% stemmed from other sources (e.g., heard
about the study from a friend, family member, person in the
study). There were no significant demographic differences
for participants recruited from these varying sources.
Approaches to reduce attrition included use of letters and
telephone reminders for all appointments, flexibility
regarding working around vacations and medical and other
crises, reimbursement for transportation costs, and participant honoraria. Participants received $75 for completing
the baseline interviews and assessments, and $75 upon
completion of the 12-month follow-up evaluation.
Initial Screening
All participants were required to be at least 18 years of age,
not pregnant, able to read and speak English, and considered to be physically capable of attending the scheduled
sessions. Persons who used wheelchairs and those who
were bedridden or housebound were excluded due to the
practical difficulties of keeping therapy appointments.
Referrals to local physicians who treat CFS and to support
groups were offered to these individuals. After a consent
form was filled out, prospective participants were initially
screened by the second author using a structured questionnaire. The study was approved by the DePaul
University Institutional Review Board.
The CFS Questionnaire
This screening scale was initially validated by Jason et al.
(1997). This scale is used to collect demographic, health
status, medication usage, and symptom data, and it uses the
definitional symptoms of CFS (Fukuda et al., 1994). Hawk,
Jason, and Torres-Harding (2007) recently revised this CFS
Questionnaire and administered the questionnaire to three
groups (CFS, major depressive disorder, and healthy controls). The revised instrument, which was used in the
present study, evidences good test–retest reliability and has
good sensitivity and specificity.
The CFS Questionnaire was designed to assess the
diagnostic criteria for CFS as specified by Fukuda et al.
(1994). For each symptom, participants were asked to
indicate if the symptom had been present for six months or
longer, if the symptom began before the onset of their
fatigue or health problems, and how often (never, seldom,
often/usually, or always) the symptom is experienced.
Participants were also asked to rate the severity of each
symptom they endorsed on a scale of 0 to 100, where
0 = no problem and 100 = the worst problem possible.
This is a numerical rating scale, which has been shown to
be a consistently valid measure of symptom intensity,
particularly for pain intensity (Jensen & Karoly, 1992). To
be diagnosed with the Fukuda et al. (1994) CFS criteria,
participants were required to experience persistent or
relapsing fatigue for a period of six or more months concurrent with at least four of eight specific minor symptoms
that did not predate the illness. In assessing case definition
symptoms, items were designed to measure the severity of
the eight minor symptoms (i.e., impaired memory or concentration, sore throat, tender lymph nodes, muscle pain,
J Clin Psychol Med Settings (2007) 14:275–296 277
123
multi-joint pain, new headaches, unrefreshing sleep, and
post-exertion malaise) as specified by the Fukuda et al.
case definition.
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV. Next, a semistructured psychiatric interview, the Structured Clinical
Interview for DSM-IV (SCID) (Spitzer, Williams, Gibbon,
& First, 1995) was administered in order to establish Axis I
psychiatric diagnoses. The professionally administered
SCID allows for clinical judgment in the assignment of
symptoms to psychiatric or medical categories, a crucial
distinction in the assessment of symptoms that overlap
between CFS and psychiatric disorders, e.g., fatigue, concentration difficulty, and sleep disturbance (Friedberg &
Jason, 1998). A psychodiagnostic study (Taylor & Jason,
1998) validated the use of the SCID in a sample of CFS
patients. Because CFS is a diagnosis of exclusion, prospective participants were screened for identifiable
psychiatric and medical conditions that may explain CFSlike symptoms.
These measures were completed at DePaul University
and took approximately 2 h. After the initial interview was
completed, the participants’ information was reviewed to
ensure that they met all eligibility requirements. If an
individual was eligible for the study, a medical appointment was set up. Conversely, if an individual was not
eligible, alternate treatment options were discussed.
Medical Assessment of CFS
The physician screening evaluation included an in-depth
medical and neurological history and a general and neurological physical examination. The evaluation also
included a structured instrument, a modified version of the
CFS questionnaire (Komaroff et al., 1996). This instrument
assesses the signs, symptoms, and medical history to rule
out other disorders. Relevant medical information was
gathered to exclude possible other medical causes of
chronic fatigue, including exposure histories to tuberculosis, AIDS, and non-AIDS sexually transmitted diseases.
Information on prescribed and illicit drug use was also
assessed and recorded. Finally the histories of all symptoms related to CFS were gathered.
Laboratory tests included a chemistry screen (which
assesses liver, renal, and thyroid functioning), complete
blood count with differential and platelet count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, arthritic profile (which includes
rheumatoid factor and antinuclear antibody), hepatitis B,
Lyme disease screen, HIV screen and urinalysis. A tuberculin skin test was also performed. The project physician
performed a detailed medical examination to detect
evidence of diffuse adenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly,
synovitis, neuropathy, myopathy, cardiac or pulmonary
dysfunction. These laboratory tests in the battery were used
to rule out other illnesses (Fukuda et al., 1994); in other
words, they are used as exclusionary criteria rather than as
inclusionary criteria. Twenty-four individuals who were
screened were excluded due to a variety of reasons (i.e.,
lifelong fatigue, less than the required four secondary
symptoms of CFS, BMI [ 45, melancholic depression or
bipolar depression, alcohol or substance abuse disorder,
autoimmune thyroiditis, cancer, lupus, rheumatoid
arthritis).
Randomization to Study Treatments
After enrollment into the study, each participant was randomly assigned to one of the four non-pharmacologic
intervention conditions. Random assignment was done
using a random number generator in statistical software
(SPSS version 12).
Functional Status
Medical Outcomes Study-Short Form-36 (MOS-SF-36)
The MOS-SF-36 is a 36 item broadly-based self-report
measure of functional status related to health (Ware &
Sherbourne, 1992). A higher score indicates better health
or less impact of health on functioning. An example of a
question on this form follows: Does your health now limit
you in these activities? Walking one block (Yes, limited a
lot; Yes, limited a little; No, not limited at all). Test construction studies for the SF-36 (McHorney, Ware, Lu, &
Sherbourne, 1994) have shown adequate internal consistency, significant discriminate validity among subscales,
and substantial differences between patient and non-patient
populations in the pattern of scores. The SF-36 has also
demonstrated sufficient psychometric properties as a measure of functional status in a CFS population (Buchwald,
Pearlman, Umali, Schmaling, & Katon, 1996). The MOS
Physical Functioning scale was utilized in the present
investigation as it has been used in several other CFS
outcomes studies (Deale et al., 1997).
Employment Status
This measure of role function consisted of work status
(working versus nonworking). Employed included those
who were working at least 20 h per week or in school
full-time. Unemployed included those who were retired,
working fewer than 20 h per week, not in school, or parttime student.
278 J Clin Psychol Med Settings (2007) 14:275–296
123
Six-minute Walking Test
As an in vivo behavioral measure of physical functioning,
the six-minute walking test (Butland, Pang, Gross, Woodcock, & Geddes, 1982) was used. The test measures the
distance walked during a six-minute interval. The test is a
useful and reproducible measure of exercise tolerance,
provides a simple practical guide to everyday disability,
and does not require expensive apparatus (Butland et al.,
1982). Exercise intolerance is a key symptomatic feature of
CFS (Friedberg & Jason, 1998). Significant improvements
in exercise tolerance as measured by the six minute
walking test were associated with the successful clinical
outcome of a graded activity intervention in CFS (Sharpe
et al., 1996).
Fatigue and Pain
Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS)
The Krupp, LaRocca, Muir-Nash, and Steinberg (1989)
Fatigue Severity Scale was used to measure fatigue. This
scale includes nine items rated on 7-point scales and is
sensitive to different aspects and gradations of fatigue
severity. Most items are related to behavioral consequences
of fatigue. An example of a question from this scale is the
following: Fatigue interferes with my work, family, or
social life (1 = strongly disagree to 7 = strongly agree).
Previous findings have demonstrated the utility of the FSS
(Krupp et al., 1989) to discriminate between individuals
with CFS, MS, and primary depression (Pepper, Krupp,
Friedberg, Doscher, & Coyle, 1993). In addition, the FSS
(Krupp et al., 1989) was normed on a sample of individuals
with multiple sclerosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and
healthy controls. A study by Taylor, Jason, and Torres
(2000) compared the Fatigue Scale (Chalder, Berelowitz,
Pawlikowska, Watts, & Wessely, 1993) with the FSS
(Krupp et al., 1989) with a sample of healthy controls and a
CFS-like group. Within a CFS-like group, the Fatigue
Severity Scale (Krupp et al., 1989) was more closely
associated with severity ratings for the eight Fukuda et al.
(1994) CFS symptoms as well as with functional outcomes
related to fatigue.
Brief Pain Inventory
The Brief Pain Inventory (Cleeland & Ryan, 1994) was
administered to measure the intensity of pain (pain severity) and the interference of pain in the patient’s life (pain
interference). Higher scores indicate more severe levels of
persistent pain and higher levels of interference with
functioning. An example of an item from this scale follows: During the past 24 h pain has interfered with your
general activity (0 = does not interfere to 10 = completely
interferes). This measure exhibits adequate levels of
reliability to assess pain in non-cancer samples, with
coefficient alphas of .70 and above. It also evidences good
concurrent validity with other generic pain measures, and
has been shown to be sensitive to changes in pain status
over time (Keller et al., 2004).
Psychological/Well-Being Assessments
Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II)
Because depression is the most commonly diagnosed
psychiatric disorder in CFS (Friedberg, 1996), a quantitative measure of depression severity was used. Depressive
symptomatology was measured with the BDI-II (Beck,
Steer, & Brown, 1996), a 21-item self-report instrument
with well-established psychometric properties. An example
of an item follows: Pick out a statement that best describes
the way you have been feeling during the past two weeks,
including today: Sadness (I do not feel sad; I feel sad much
of the time; I am sad all the time; I am so sad or unhappy I
can’t stand it). This version of the BDI is more consistent
with DSM-IV criteria for major depressive disorder than
the earlier version. The BDI-II is the only depression rating
scale to be empirically tested and interpreted for both
individuals with CFS who were depressed and those that
were not depressed (Johnson, DeLuca & Natelson, 1996).
Also the BDI-II has shown sensitivity to treatment changes
in two cognitive behavioral treatment studies of CFS
(Deale et al., 1997).
Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI)
Anxiety symptoms were measured with the BAI, a 21-
item self-report measure with established and replicated
construct validity (Hewitt & Norton, 1993; Steer, Clark,
Beck, & Ranieri, 1995). An example of an item follows:
Indicate how much you have been bothered by each
symptom during the past week, including today: Nervousness (Not at all, Mildly, Moderately, Severely).
Factor analysis of the BAI and BDI yielded a first-order
factor labeled anxiety that had salient loadings for all 21
items on the BAI, but only one item on the BDI. Anxiety
symptoms at intake was a predictor of treatment outcome
in two cognitive behavioral treatment studies of CFS
(Sharpe et al., 1996). Also there is a high frequency of
anxiety disorders reported in psychodiagnostic studies of
CFS (e.g., Pepper et al., 1993).
J Clin Psychol Med Settings (2007) 14:275–296 279
123
Self-efficacy
This self-efficacy measure focused on how much control a
person feels with respect to CFS complaints. The ratings
from each of the five questions are added, and higher scores
indicate higher levels of self-efficacy. An example of an
item follows: I think I can positively influence my fatigue
(Completely disagree, disagree, neutral, agree, completely
agree). Cronbach’s alpha reliability ranges from .70 to .77
(Prins et al., 2001). This scale has been used in one of the
major trials involving CFS and CBT (Prins et al., 2001).
Perceived Stress Scale
The Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) is a four-item revised
version of a previous 14-item measure of global perceived
stress. One example of an item is: In the last month, how often
have you felt that you were unable to control the important
things in your life? (Never, almost never, sometimes, fairly
often, very often). The time period that this instrument
measured was the previous month (Cohen, Kamarck, &
Mermelstein, 1983). The authors report a coefficient alpha
reliability of .72 for the four-item short version. The Total
Stress score was used in the present study. It has a range from
0 to 16, with higher scores indicating more stress.
Quality of Life Scale
The Quality of Life Scale measures satisfaction with
different life activities for individuals with various chronic
illnesses (Burckhardt & Anderson, 2003). The scale consists
of 16 items answered on a Likert type 1 to 7 scale which
measures six conceptual domains of quality of life: material
and physical well-being; relationships with other people;
social, community and civic activities; personal development and fulfillment; recreation; and independence. Higher
scores mean more overall life satisfaction. Participants were
asked to circle the number that best describes how satisfied
they are at this time (e.g., close relationships with spouse or
significant other; choices ranging from terrible to delighted).
This scale demonstrated high test–retest reliability for this
16-item scale, and convergent and discriminate construct
validity in groups of individuals with various stable chronic
illnesses, including post-ostomy surgery, osteoarthritis,
rheumatoid arthritis, fibromyalgia, COPD, and insulindependent diabetes (Burckhardt & Anderson, 2003).
Global Impression of Change Rating
Overall change was assessed on a 7-point clinician rating
scale, ranging from ‘‘very much improved’’ to ‘‘very much
worse’’ (Sharpe et al., 1996). Participants also provided a
rating of the treatment effectiveness (ranging from
‘‘worse’’ to ‘‘much improved’’), satisfaction with treatment
(ranging from ‘‘very satisfied’’ to ‘‘dissatisfied’’), usefulness of treatment (ranging from ‘‘very useful’’ to ‘‘not
useful’’), and level of overall improvement (ranging from
‘‘very much improved’’ to ‘‘much worse’’).
Treatment Protocols
The 13 session CBT, COG, ACT, and RELAX conditions
were conducted during 45 min meetings that were held
once every 2 weeks (see Table 1). Two registered nurses
with previous training and many years of experience in
psychotherapy served as the interventionists. During the
first 1.5 years of the study, each nurse implemented two of
the interventions (either CBT and RELAX or ACT and
COG). At the mid point in the study, re-training occurred,
and each nurse was assigned the two interventions that she
did not conduct during the first 1.5 years. In this way, each
therapist over the course of the study implemented all four
treatment modalities. Each of the interventions was individualized, and the exact dose was somewhat different for
different members. While interventions were individualized for different participants, these variations were not
quantified or documented.
Cognitive Behavior Therapy (CBT)
The CBT treatment regimen was developed in collaboration with Vincent Deary, who has worked for many years
with the team that completed a successful controlled clinical trial of CBT in CFS (Deale et al., 1997). This
treatment was collaborative, educative, and negotiated with
participants based on a comprehensive cognitive–behavioral emphasis. Specifically, participants were asked to
evaluate the effect of gradual and consistent increases in
activity and utilize strategies other than avoidance. The aim
was to show participants that activity levels could be
increased steadily and safely without exacerbating symptoms. The 13-session protocol is summarized below.
Sessions 1–3. The first three sessions involved engaging
participants in therapy and offering them a detailed treatment rationale. A careful assessment of presenting
problems was made, including an analysis of the initial in
vivo assessment of participant activity, stress, mood, and
fatigue.
Sessions 4–7. During session four, a schedule of planned, graded activity was developed in collaboration with
the participant. Initial activity targets were modest, and
small enough to be sustained despite fluctuations in
280 J Clin Psychol Med Settings (2007) 14:275–296
123
Table 1 Shared and distinct activities among treatment groups
CBT COG ACT RELAX
Common activities
Nurse therapist Yes Yes Yes Yes
13 bi-weekly sessions Yes Yes Yes Yes
Activity homework Yes Yes Yes Yes
Future implementation of treatment strategies Yes Yes Yes Yes
Activities CBT
Utilize strategies other than avoidance Yes Yes No No
Activity level increase Yes No Yes No
Stabilize activity and rest Yes Yes No No
Schedule of planned, graded activity Yes No No No
Assertiveness training Yes Yes No No
Anxiety management Yes No No No
Stress management Yes No No Yes
Assessment of activity, stress, mood, and fatigue Yes No No No
Identify and record NATs homework Yes No No No
Activity and rest pre-planned, not symptom driven Yes No No No
Cognitive strategies Yes Yes No No
Record unhelpful/bad thoughts Yes No No No
Sleep routine established Yes No No No
Activities COG
Activity pacing No Yes No No
Identify and resolve anger No Yes No No
Improve frustration tolerance No Yes No No
Eliminate performance-based self-esteem No Yes No No
Memory assistance No Yes No No
Affirmations No Yes No No
Strategies for preventing and coping with setbacks Yes Yes Yes No
Teaching coping and stress reduction skills Yes Yes No No
Rapport building No Yes No No
Personal illness account No Yes No No
Relaxation exercises No Yes No Yes
Cue-controlled relaxation No Yes No No
Cognitive coping statements Yes Yes No No
Record daily stress and fatigue No Yes No Yes
Imagery technique of pleasant mood induction No Yes No Yes
Discussion of the quality of social support No Yes No No
Activities ACT
Measure changes in flexibility and strength No No Yes No
Complete a daily exercise diary No No Yes No
Set specific goals Yes No Yes No
Exercise diary No No Yes No
Energy system and exercise education No No Yes No
Prescribing appropriate anaerobic exercise No No Yes No
Monitoring/maintaining functional gains No No Yes No
Identify problems with anaerobic exercise compliance No No Yes No
Activities RELAX
Progressive muscle relaxation No No No Yes
Relaxation records No No No Yes
J Clin Psychol Med Settings (2007) 14:275–296 281
123
symptoms. Activity was not always increased immediately.
Instead, activity and rest were pre-planned and time-contingent rather than symptom-driven. Activity and rest were
divided into small, manageable portions spread across the
day. For example, three 5-min walks daily would be
scheduled, rather than a 45-min walk once a week. Participants were encouraged to persevere in their
predetermined goals. Henceforth, they were instructed to
try and avoid both reducing targets on ‘‘bad’’ days, and
exceeding them on ‘‘good’’ days. A discussion of negative
automatic thoughts (NATs) emphasized their relationship
to feelings and behavior (e.g., I always need the approval
of others. I can never tolerate being hurt). In addition to
activity homework, assignments intended to identify and
record NATs were also provided to participants.
Sessions 8–13. NATs were discussed in relation to
difficulties with planned activities. After thoughts regarding symptoms, rest, sleep, and high performance
expectations were identified, cognitive strategies were then
introduced. The aim was to develop new ways of thinking,
which would effectively promote recovery. Participants
continued to record any unhelpful or distressing thoughts.
Furthermore, through discussions and homework, they
were encouraged to practice generating less catastrophic
and more helpful alternatives. These cognitive strategies
focused on fears about symptoms and treatment as well as
perfectionism, self-criticism, and unrealistic performance
expectations. Once a structured schedule was established
and tolerance began to develop, activity was gradually
increased and rest was slowly reduced.
Specific daily targets that covered a range of activities
(such as walking, reading, visiting friends or gardening)
were also agreed upon. Furthermore, a sleep routine was
established. This schedule included the cessation of
daytime sleeping, the establishment of a set wake-up
time every morning, and a general reduction of all time
spent in bed. Sleep hygiene and stimulus control techniques for participants with insomnia were also
incorporated. In the final sessions, strategies for dealing
with setbacks were rehearsed. Participants created action
plans and coping strategies to guide them through the
coming months. The importance of maintaining the
principles of therapy after termination were also
reinforced.
Anaerobic Activity Therapy (ACT)
The ACT treatment focused on developing individualized,
constructive and pleasurable activities accompanied by
reinforcement of progress. Staci Stevens, an exercise
physiologist, who has previously worked on similar interventions, supervised this condition.
In order to gain an assessment of flexibility and strength
at both pre- and post-test, participants in all conditions
completed the shoulder flexibility test, which measures the
flexibility in the right and left shoulders. All participants
also completed the sit and reach test, which is the most
widely used measure of flexibility and a primary component of most physical fitness tests. The test is designed to
measure the extensibility of the hamstring muscles and the
lower back articulations by evaluating the maximal reach
an individual can make in a seated position. This test has
excellent test–retest and intra-rater reliability (Gabbe,
Bennell, Wajswelner, & Finch, 2004). Finally, all participants completed the hand dynamometer, which measures a
person’s grip strength and is a good measure of loss of
work capacity (Chengalur, Smith, Nelson, & Sadoff, 1990).
It is fast, easy to perform, and produces a reliable report
that is simple to record (Innes, 1999). Information from
these tests were helpful in guiding the therapists’ 13-session protocol, which is summarized below.
Sessions 1–3. The first three sessions involved engaging
participants in therapy and offering them a detailed
treatment rationale. The intervention was described to
participants as involving activity scheduling and progress
assessments. The treatment plan involved three phases:
engagement and education, exercise prescription and
monitoring, and maintaining functional gains. Behavioral
goals for the program were explained to the participants
and included energy system education, redefining exercise,
prescribing appropriate exercise, increasing selected daily
physical activities, and improving quality of life. The
participants were assisted in translating these principles to
certain physical activities employed in daily living. Participants were shown the principle of specificity in training
for achieving functional gains and educated about its
integral role within the exercise prescription.
After learning to acknowledge the reality of their
symptoms, participants received an explanation regarding
Table 1 continued
CBT COG ACT RELAX
Autogenic training No No No Yes
Breathing focus techniques No No No Yes
Relaxation in stressful situations No No No Yes
Yoga No No No Yes
282 J Clin Psychol Med Settings (2007) 14:275–296
123
the benefits of the pragmatic rehabilitative approach as well
as the exercise model. Exercise progression was also
described at this time. Participants were informed about the
importance of gradually increasing anaerobic activity levels, and were asked to complete a daily exercise diary.
Participants were requested to identify any goals and/or
problems that they were experiencing with regards to
exercise compliance.
Sessions 4–7. The self-monitoring diaries were reviewed
and the rationale for treatment was evaluated. The aim was
for behavioral homework to reinforce gradual, consistent
increases in selected physical activity and discourage rapid
fluctuations in activity. Preliminary targets were set at a
safe, achievable level to maximize the likelihood of success. Each individual was given an exercise program that
included both pictures and descriptions. Additionally,
flexibility and exercise program guidelines were provided
along with an exercise diary that detailed each program.
This diary had to be attended to daily, and the exercise
frequency was fixed at three times per week. The participants were informed that some amount of muscle soreness
should be expected as a result of the exercise activity.
Participants were also taught the difference between muscle soreness that may be a result of the exercise program
and muscle pain. Participants were urged not to progress
too quickly by adding their own exercises or excessively
increasing intensity levels within normal daily activities.
The goal was to reinforce gradual increases in activity
rather than to promote sudden amplifications. As an
example of stretching and strengthening, the participant
would start with one set of four repetitions for each exercise. If the patient was successful with this assignment and
felt no physical repercussions or delayed recovery
response, they would then be encouraged to gradually
progress until there was one set of eight repetitions was
reached. Next, the participant would increase to two sets,
starting at two sets of four repetitions.
Session 8–13. Homework was reviewed, problems were
identified and dealt with, and targets were set for the following week. Preparations were continued for the
maintenance of functional gains. New targets were established only after habituation was achieved to existing ones
or if the participant consistently achieved his or her goals
for a period of two weeks. The therapist conveyed a
positive outlook, and all achievements were warmly reinforced. In depth analyses of in vivo activity and symptom
records confirmed behavioral progress and identified
potential and actual behavioral setbacks. As a result, new
behavioral prescriptions with scheduling modifications
were developed. In these final sessions, strategies for preventing and dealing with setbacks and relapses were
rehearsed. The importance of maintaining the principles of
therapy after termination were also reinforced.
Cognitive Therapy Treatment (COG)
This condition, formulated and supervised by Fred Friedberg, a clinical psychologist, incorporated a broad-based
cognitive approach that focused on developing cognitive
strategies to better tolerate and reduce stress and symptoms, and to lessen self-criticism. Cognitive changes were
linked, in principle, to achieving a healthy balance between
activity, rest, and leisure.
COG training was focused on treating maladaptive
beliefs associated with illness-related depression, anxiety,
and anger. It is a credible condition because it involves
actively listening to participant’s complaints, as well as
teaching coping and stress reduction skills. In comparison
to CBT and ACT, the COG condition does not include
structured schedules of increasing activity or exercise
(Deale et al., 1997; Fulcher & White, 1997; Sharpe et al.,
1996). Rather, this approach emphasizes pacing activities,
which involves trying to remain as active as possible while
avoiding over-exertion. Low effort activities that are not
associated with symptom flare-ups are selectively
increased while symptom-producing activities are
decreased or managed more effectively. For instance,
activity pacing was applied to completing job or household
tasks in energy-conserving small steps that were less likely
to produce symptom flare-ups. In a more narrowly focused
early version of this protocol (Friedberg & Krupp, 1994), a
trend toward reduced depression scores and significant
reductions in maladaptive illness beliefs were found.
However, there were no changes in functional status. The
13-session COG protocol is summarized below.
Sessions 1–3. During the initial session, the therapist
explained the purpose and goals of the intervention.
Because of numerous encounters with physicians and
others who have treated patients with CFS with condescension and even ridicule (McKenzie, Dechene,
Friedberg, & Fontanetta, 1995), rapport building was a
critical aspect of the treatment regimen (Deale et al.,
1997). As an initial intervention, the participant’s personal
account of his/her illness, including CFS symptoms and
their effects on vocational functioning, marital satisfaction,
social relationships, and physical exercise was placed in the
context of the four stage progressive model of chronic
illness (Fennell, 1995). The model serves as a coping tool
that allows the participant to view his/her reactions to the
illness as understandable adjustments to an unpredictable,
disabling condition. It also allowed the therapist to better
target and individualize the coping techniques presented
below.
Sessions 4–8. These sessions focused on stress reduction
techniques for intrusive illness symptoms and limitations,
as well as emotional distress. Initially, relaxation exercises
were demonstrated and rehearsed in session. They were
J Clin Psychol Med Settings (2007) 14:275–296 283
123
later prescribed for home use with audiocassette tapes.
Cue-controlled relaxation was then introduced to create an
association between the self-instructed relaxation and the
feeling state of being relaxed. Specific relaxation benefits
were addressed to the participant so that active use of
relaxation as a coping skill (Ost, 1987) was clearly
explained. In addition, cognitive coping statements were
formulated and prescribed to counteract (1) catastrophic
thinking about illness limitations and its vocational and
social consequences; (2) symptom-exacerbating selfdemands for high achievement; and (3) intolerance of illness symptoms. To encourage practice of these coping
skills, daily stress and fatigue records were reviewed to
identify stress/symptom associations and then to prescribe
relaxation and cognitive coping techniques to ameliorate
these symptoms.
Sessions 9–13. As participants incorporated stress
management and cognitive coping strategies into their
daily routine, the imagery technique of pleasant mood
induction was introduced as a method of alleviating
depressed mood and uplifting mood in general. Pleasant
mood induction involved visualizing enjoyable activities
and events that could be performed by the participant,
given the limitations of his or her illness. If the imagery
exercises succeeded in elevating mood, they were incorporated into daily relaxation practice. The quality of social
support was discussed in order to identify maladaptive
beliefs that were detrimental to marital, family, and other
significant relationships. Once identified, these maladaptive
beliefs were used to generate cognitive coping statements
that were intended to ameliorate relationship-damaging
beliefs. These individually constructed coping statements
were assigned as daily homework and were designed to
counteract maladaptive thinking about relationships. Such
sessions were devoted to the identification of specific
cognitive difficulties and exposure to memory compensation and cognitive retraining techniques. For instance, to
reduce debilitating feelings of cognitive overload, the
participant was encouraged to (1) allow extra time to
complete activities, (2) minimize distractions, and (3)
watch for signs of increased mental fatigue and take necessary rest breaks. During the final session, the therapist
and participant reviewed the course of therapy, including
specific coping techniques that were learned and utilized.
Improvements were also assessed in light of the four stage
progressive model of CFS. Finally, a plan was developed to
maintain the effective coping skills gained.
Relaxation Treatment (RELAX)
This condition was based on several prior studies in the
area of chronic illness that showed relaxation training to be
an effective means of improving coping skills, reducing
sleep disturbances and anxiety, and increasing general
well-being and tolerance to illness. Dr. Fred Friedberg also
supervised this arm of the study. Several types of relaxation
were demonstrated to participants along with expectations
for skills practice over a 13-session period.
Sessions 1–3. During the first session, the participant’s
history was obtained and the rationale for using relaxation
techniques to treat CFS was explained. Participants were
asked to keep a stress/fatigue diary. During session two, the
stress diary was reviewed and the participants were provided an introduction to relaxation. They were shown how
to engage in progressive muscle relaxation, and were asked
to engage in this relaxation technique twice daily for the
next two weeks. During session three, the results of the
practice were discussed, and participants were provided
more coaching to allow them to effectively practice this
technique on their own.
Sessions 4–8. During session four, participants’ relaxation records were reviewed as a means to assess the
effectiveness of the progressive muscle relaxation techniques. Autogenic training was introduced, and practice
sessions were devoted to this relaxation technique.
Homework assignments were given to the participants, and
they were encouraged to record their efforts to engage in
this relaxation response. Breathing focus techniques were
also introduced, and participants were asked to practice
these techniques at home.
Sessions 9–13. During session 9, breathing focus
homework was reviewed for compliance and effectiveness.
Yoga form stretching was next introduced and offered in
session and debriefed. Thematic imagery relaxation was
subsequently demonstrated, and participants were asked to
practice this relaxation technique at home. Participants
were also shown how to use relaxation during stressful
situations. For the last session, there was a review of the
most helpful relaxation techniques that had been covered in
the prior sessions. Progress made in therapy was reviewed,
and a post-treatment relaxation program was developed in
collaboration with the participant.
Participation
Participants attended an average of 10 sessions out of a
possible 13 sessions, with a range from 1 to 13. There were
no significant differences between the conditions in regards
to how many sessions were attended. The average dropout
rate was 25%, but it was not significantly different per
condition. Dropouts were conservatively defined as
attending four or fewer sessions or stopping therapy prior
to satisfactory completion of therapy (as rated by the
therapist, Project Director and Principal Investigator).
284 J Clin Psychol Med Settings (2007) 14:275–296
123
This definition has been used by others and is very conservative. These dropout rates are comparable to other
clinical trials with CFS (Whiting et al., 2001). For example,
among CBT and ACT trials in patients with CFS, drop-out
rates of 28% (Prins et al., 2001), 29% (Wearden et al., 1998),
34% (Ridsdale et al., 2001), 34% (Ridsdale et al., 2004), and
39% (Akagi, Klimes, & Bass, 2001) have been found. The
only US based study of CFS among Gulf War Veterans using
CBT and graded activity actually found that only 30% of
participants adhered to the treatment (Donta et al., 2003).
Statistics
The Best Linear Unbiased Predictor is an estimator that
follows from the Laird and Ware random effects model
(Robinson, 1991). In other words, this value represents a
slope of the raw data over time. Within each person, there
will be in the current study up to four values (baseline, posttest, 6 and 12 month follow-up). The Best Linear Unbiased
Predictor is the slope of those four values, but if there are
only two or three values, a slope can still be determined for
that case. What this allows is for a slope for every case with
at least two data points. The Laird and Ware random effects
model is well established in the statistical literature (Laird
& Ware, 1982). The analyses here are modeled after those
presented by Gould, Abramson, Galasko and Salmon
(2001), who indicate that the Best Linear Unbiased Predictor is an unbiased estimator of the population mean and
is a linear combination of the observations. It minimizes the
mean squared error (MSE), where the mean is taken across
all individuals in the population.
Results
Sample
There were 29 participants each in the CBT and ACT
conditions and 28 in the COG and RELAX conditions.
There were no statistically significant socio-demographic
differences among these groups at baseline. Of the 114
participants, 16.7% were male and 83.3% were female. The
average age at baseline was 43.8 years. Regarding ethnicity, 87.7% were Caucasian, 4.4% were African-American,
4.4% were Latino, and 3.5% were Asian-American. As for
marital status, 49.1% were married/living with someone,
33.3% were single, and 17.6% were either divorced or
separated. In terms of work status at the baseline, 24.6%
were on disability, 23.7% were unemployed, 20.2% were
working part-time, 19.3% were working full-time, 6.1%
were retired, 4.4% were part-time students, .9% were full
time students, and .9% were working part-time and on
disability. In terms of education, 47.4% had earned a
standard college degree, 21.8% had a graduate or professional degree, 21.1% had partial college, and 9.7% had a
high school/GED degree or less. In regard to psychiatric
co-morbidity, 62.3% had a lifetime Axis I diagnosis, and
38.6% had a current Axis I diagnosis (depressive and
anxiety disorders were most common).
Fidelity Ratings
In order to verify the distinctiveness of the behavioral
treatments, a validation study was completed using a fidelity
rating scale developed for this study. A random sample of
audiotaped sessions were selected, and each session was
rated to the degree that the therapists exhibited behaviors and
introduced techniques that were unique to each of the four
treatment conditions. Fidelity ratings were implemented in
order to monitor the consistency of implementation of the
different treatment conditions, as specified in each treatment
manual, and to ensure that the treatment conditions were in
fact distinct. Ratings were conducted by a licensed psychologist and a master’s level psychologist, both of whom
were familiar with CFS and who had training and experience
in cognitive behavior therapy techniques.
First, inter-rater reliabilities were computed for 34 audio
taped treatment sessions to ensure an acceptable level of
inter-rater reliability. For these sessions, median inter-rater
percent agreement for item reliability was .79, and these
were at an acceptable level (Steve Hollon, personal communication reference, June 17, 1998).
Next, mean scores for 46 rated sessions indicated that
the four treatment conditions were significantly differentiated by the questions tapping the corresponding categories
(see Table 2). There was some overlap between the COG
and CBT conditions, but that is because the COG condition
includes CBT cognitive issues. T-tests indicated that the
majority of the items that reflected the various cognitive–
behavioral techniques in fact discriminated between the
conditions at the p\.05 level. This suggested that the
therapists implemented the treatment conditions as specified by the treatment manual. Further, high ratings on each
set of items were in the expected direction for each treatment condition, when assessed by a clinical expert in
cognitive–behavior therapy. Thus, our fidelity rating scale
analyses indicated that the four treatments arms were
distinct and were implemented as specified in the corresponding treatment manuals for each condition.
Outcome Data
The Best Linear Unbiased Predictors represent estimates of
random effects, which are the within-person slopes.
J Clin Psychol Med Settings (2007) 14:275–296 285
123
Table 2 Fidelity ratings across four conditions
CBT COG ACT RELAX
F-value
CBT questions
Did the therapist discuss a rationale for a graded activity technique(s)? 2.82abc 1.00a 1.00b 1.36c 5.47*
Did the therapist discuss initial assessment data in order to establish a consistent baseline routine? 2.55abc 1.00a 1.10b 1.07c 4.16*
Did the therapist discuss or assign a schedule of gradually increased activity? 2.64abc 1.00a 1.10b 1.07c 4.70*
Did the therapist identify beliefs related to the dangers of increasing activity such as the occurrence or
intensification of symptoms?
1.36 1.00 1.20 1.07 1.33
Were new cognitive strategies to reduce fears about symptoms discussed or assigned? 1.18 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.07
How much did the therapist focus on maintaining activity assignments regardless of symptom
fluctuations?
1.91 1.00 1.40 1.00 2.08
Mean for all CBT questions 2.07abc 1.00a 1.13b 1.10c 6.95**
ACT questions
Did the therapist discuss a rationale for an anaerobic exercise(s)? 1.09a 1.71b 5.00abc 1.00c 31.55***
Did the therapist demonstrate in session or explain to the client how to do an anaerobic exercise? 1.00a 1.00b 4.40abc 1.00c 15.75***
To what extent did the therapist focus on individualizing an anaerobic exercise prescription for the client? 1.00a 1.00b 5.70abc 1.00c 75.40***
To what extent did the therapist troubleshoot client problems with anaerobic exercise? 1.00a 1.00b 5.50abc 1.43c 28.91***
Mean for all ACT questions 1.02a 1.11b 5.15abc 1.10c 53.57***
COG questions
Did the therapist discuss a rationale for a coping skills technique(s)? 1.55a 4.45abc 1.00b 1.00c 19.78***
Did the therapist explore with the client a general belief that underlies many of the client’s specific
negative thoughts and beliefs?
3.45cd 3.45ab 1.20ac 1.00bd 6.71***
Did the therapist and client practice possible rational responses to the client’s negative thoughts or
beliefs?
1.82a 2.91abc 1.40b 1.07c 3.85*
Did the therapist explore with the client how the client’s way of communicating affects her/his
interpersonal relationships?
1.73abc 1.18a 1.00b 1.14c 3.00*
Did the therapist encourage the client to consider potential options for dealing with an interpersonal
problem (or role expectation issue within a relationship)?
2.91cd 2.36ad 1.00ac 1.21bd 4.11*
Did the therapist discuss or assign reductions in family, social, vocational, recreational,or exercise
activities?
2.91ab 2.18 1.40a 1.36b 2.96*
Did the therapist encourage the client to engage in activities (other than a relaxation exercise) which
would be pleasurable?
3.27a 2.91b 1.10ab 1.93 2.90*
Mean for all COG questions 2.52ad 2.78bc 1.16ab 1.24cd 12.83***
RELAX questions
Did the therapist discuss the rationale for using a relaxation exercise? 2.00a 2.55 1.00b 4.14ab 4.93**
Did the therapist administer a relaxation technique to the client during the session? 1.00a 2.09b 1.00c 6.14abc 26.69***
Did the therapist discuss or assign relaxation exercises as homework? 1.82a 2.82bd 1.00cd 5.50abc 11.88***
To what extent did the therapist troubleshoot client problems with a relaxation exercise? 1.18a 1.91b 1.00c 5.07abc 25.60***
Mean for all RELAX questions 1.50a 2.34bd 1.00cd 5.21abc 27.16***
286 J Clin Psychol Med Settings (2007) 14:275–296
123
Tables 3 and 5 provide the means of these slopes across all
persons within conditions. The slope represents change per
month, and statistical analyses were conducted on the slope
values. Values with a negative sign indicate a decrease per
month over time in the measure, whereas values with a
positive sign indicate an increase per month over time in
the measure (see notes at the bottom of the tables to see
whether decreases or increases are considered positive for
particular variables). Tables 4 and 6 provide the baseline
and 12 month follow-up means and standard deviations.
As an example, for physical functioning, the COG condition had a score of .82 in Table 3, which means that there
was an average of .82 change for each of 18 months of
the study, or an average change of 14.76 (.82 9 18) on the
physical functioning scale for that condition over the
18 month period of the study. The difference score on
the COG physical functioning variable based on Table 4
would result in a slightly different value (15.91), and this is
because a difference score based on two numbers (baseline
versus 12 month follow up) differs from a slope value that
has four data points (baseline, post-test, 6 and 12 month
follow up). Similar calculations from Tables 4 and 6 would
result in values that differ slightly from Tables 3 and 5
because Tables 4 and 6 use only two data points whereas
Tables 3 and 5 use four data points. Significant ANOVAS
(at the .05, .01, and .001 levels) across conditions are
indicated, and six Tukey pairwise comparisons were conducted if significant treatment effects were found. The only
overall significant difference at baseline for the treatment
conditions was the self-efficacy scale F(3,108) = 4.697,
p \.01, and post hoc analyses indicated that both the CBT
and ACT groups had significantly higher scores on this
scale than the RELAX group. Because there were 25
measures in this study, one significant difference would be
expected to occur by chance.
Among the dependent measures in Table 3, significant
overall differential treatment condition effects were found
for the SF-36 Physical Functioning subscale, the Beck
Depression and Anxiety Inventories, Self-Efficacy and the
BPI severity index. In addition, Table 5 shows that significant effects were found for the following Fukuda et al.
(1994) symptoms: sore throat, tender lymph nodes, muscle
pain, pain in multiple joints, impaired memory and concentration, post-exertional malaise, and headaches. For
each of these measures, with the exception of physical
functioning and self-efficacy, lower scores (i.e., more
negative slopes) mean change in a more favorable direction. For those variables that were significant, the COG
condition had significantly more favorable slope scores on
six variables relative to one or more other conditions
(physical functioning and depression in Table 3, and in
Table 5, the following symptoms: sore throat, pain in
Table 2
multiple joints, impaired memory or concentration, and
continued
CBT COG ACT RELAX
F-value
General therapeutic skills
How much rapport was there between therapist and client (i.e., how well did the therapist and client
get along)?
6.45 6.73 6.60 6.50 0.33
Did the therapist convey that she/he understood the client’s problems and is able to help the client? 6.55 6.45 6.50 6.36 0.14
How interesting is the therapist’s style of communication? 4.64 5.18 5.60 4.86 2.78
Did the therapist convey warmth? 6.64 6.55 6.10 6.50 1.12
Was the therapist empathic toward the client (i.e., did she/he convey an intimate understanding or
sensitivity to the client’s experiences and feelings?
6.91 6.73 6.50 6.21 2.62
How much did the therapist talk? 3.89 4.00 4.70 4.21 2.32
How much did the therapist direct or guide the session in an explicit way? 4.91 4.73 4.90 5.36 1.25
How involved was the therapist? 6.82 7.00a 7.00b 6.64ab 3.13*
In each row, cells with the same superscript are significantly different at the .05 level
* Significant at .05; ** Significant at .01; *** Significant at .001
J Clin Psychol Med Settings (2007) 14:275–296 287
123
post-exertional malaise). By comparison, the RELAX
condition had the highest slope change scores on three
variables relative to one or more other conditions (anxiety,
muscle pain, and headaches). The CBT condition only had
the highest slope change score on pain severity, and there
was no variable demonstrating highest change for the ACT
condition (although this condition had the second best
scores on depression, sore throat, and headaches).
In addition, while there were no significant differences
among conditions for a number of the variables in Tables 3
and 5, for the following variables, there was overall significant positive change over time: Fatigue Severity Scale,
Perceived Stress Scale, 6 min walk, and severity ratings for
unrefreshing sleep. In general, the participants across the
conditions evidenced positive change over time.
For the physical functioning variable, the COG and CBT
change scores were significantly higher than the ACT
condition. For the BDI-II, the COG change scores were
significantly better than the other three conditions, and the
ACT was significantly better than the CBT. For the BAI,
the RELAX condition was significantly better than the
CBT. For self-efficacy, the RELAX condition was significantly better than the ACT condition. For pain severity,
the CBT, COG, and ACT conditions did significantly better
than the RELAX condition.
When examining the Fukuda symptom data, the COG
condition had significantly more improvement in sore
throat severity than the CBT condition. For tender lymph
nodes, there were no significant differences between conditions. For muscle pain, the RELAX condition did
significantly better than the three other conditions, and the
COG did significantly better than the ACT condition. For
pain in multiple joints, the COG condition did significantly
better than the three other conditions, and the CBT and
ACT conditions did significantly better than the RELAX
condition. For impaired memory, the COG and CBT conditions had significantly more improvement than the
RELAX condition. For post-exertional malaise, the COG
and CBT conditions did significantly better than the ACT
condition. Finally for headaches, the RELAX and ACT
conditions had significantly more improvement than the
CBT condition.
Employment Changes
Because employment data were dichotomous, a GENMOD
procedure was employed using SAS to analyze these data.
No significant interaction effects were found, although
those in the CBT condition reported directionally more
change over time (percent employed increased from 45% at
baseline to 62% at the 12 month follow-up) than those in
the other three conditions (COG percent employed went
from 50% to 56%; ACT from 41% to 33%; and RELAX
from 46% to 43%).
Clinical Significance
White, Sharpe, Chalder, DeCesare, and Walwyn (2007)
have recommended using the Physical Functioning subscale of the Medical Outcomes Survey-SF-36 as a primary
outcome measure for CFS trials. In addition, Ferguson,
Robinson, and Splaine (2002) have recommended using the
Reliable Change Index (RCI), which evaluates the magnitude of change scores necessary for a measure to be
Table 3 Summary statistics on Best Linear Unbiased Predictors for non-symptom outcomes
Variables CBT COG ACT RELAX F-value
N Mean SE N Mean SE N Mean SE N Mean SE
Physical functioningB 23 0.67a 0.05 24 0.82b 0.03 23 0.22ab 0.18 25 0.43 0.14 5.03**
FatigueA 24 -0.03 0.01 24 -0.02 0.01 25 -0.03 0.01 25 -0.02 0.01 0.47
DepressionA 23 -0.11ab 0.02 24 -0.38acd 0.02 21 -0.24bc 0.01 24 -0.19d 0.03 19.60***
AnxietyA 23 -0.02a 0.04 24 -0.11 0.003 21 -0.03 0.04 24 -0.19a 0.07 3.22*
Self-efficacyB 23 -0.004 0.03 24 0.047 0.02 20 -0.04a 0.02 24 0.05a 0.02 3.38*
StressA 23 -0.10 0.03 24 -0.15 0.01 23 -0.06 0.03 25 -0.13 0.04 2.18
Pain severityA 23 -0.04a 0.0004 24 -0.03b 0.001 20 -0.02c 0.009 23 0.02abc 0.007 20.27***
Pain interferenceA 22 -0.05 0.01 24 -0.03 0.002 20 -0.02 0.03 23 0.01 0.02 1.75
Quality of lifeB 23 0.10 0.07 23 0.15 0.04 21 0.06 0.10 23 0.25 0.17 0.61
6 min walkB 20 10.90 6.27 20 6.89 1.80 15 2.40 1.33 18 6.20 0.16 0.88
A Lower scores indicate better outcome
B Higher scores indicate better outcome
In each row, cells with the same superscript are significantly different at the .05 level
* Significant at .05; ** Significant at .01; *** Significant at .001
288 J Clin Psychol Med Settings (2007) 14:275–296
123
considered statistically reliable. To determine clinical significance of the Physical Functioning subscale, the baseline
minus 12-month follow-up change scores need to exceed
the age adjusted RCI and the 12-month follow-up scores
must fall within the normative value (defined for this study
as being within one standard deviation of the mean). Using
these two criteria, the CBT, COG, ACT, and RELAX
groups achieved clinically significant improvements for
physical functioning in 18.2%, 30.4%, 11.1%, and 21.7%
of participants, but there were no significant differences
among conditions [v2 (3, N = 86) = 2.41, p = .49].
Participant and Clinician Improvement Ratings
At the 12-month follow-up, participants and clinicians rated
participant improvement. As is evident from Table 7, there
were few significant changes, although in general the CBT
and COG conditions had directionally higher ratings on two
of the four participant ratings. The only significant difference, using chi-square analyses, was between participant
ratings for level of improvement [v2 (3, N = 83) =
11.11, p = .011], with the CBT condition yielding significantly higher ratings than the ACT [v2 (1, N = 42) = 9.81,
p = .002] or RELAX [v2 (1, N = 41) = 7.16, p = .007]
conditions. Based on the physician’s diagnosis, the majority
of participants continued to have a CFS diagnosis at 12-
month follow-up (only four participants from the CBT
condition, four from the COG, two from the ACT, and 0
from the RELAX condition no longer met CFS criteria).
Discussion
The present study found few differential results among the
non-pharmacologic interventions, although the COG condition appeared to have more positive change than the other
conditions. On only three variables was one intervention
clearly and significantly different from all of the other three
conditions (depression and pain in joints for COG, and
muscle pain for RELAX). For the 25 variables examined in
this study, when one treatment condition evidenced significant positive change over at least one other condition,
seven of these occurrences were for the COG condition,
five for the CBT condition, four for the ACT condition, and
three for the RELAX condition. In other words, significant
change occurred for 28%, 20%, 16%, and 12% of the
variables for the COG, CBT, ACT, and RELAX conditions
respectively. When examining clinical significance on the
Physical Functioning subscale, somewhat similar findings
occurred, with 30.4%, 18.2%, 11.1%, and 21.7% of indiTable 4
viduals for the COG, CBT, ACT, and RELAX improving.
Means (and SD) for baseline and 12-month follow-up for non-symptom outcomes
Variables CBT COG ACT RELAX
Baseline 12 Month Baseline 12 Month Baseline 12 Month Baseline 12 Month
Physical functioningb M (SD) 46.36 (27.44) 58.64 (30.44) 45.65 (23.71) 61.09 (23.74) 39.17 (15.65) 39.72 (27.63) 53.77 (26.66) 61.20 (27.70)
Fatiguea M (SD) 6.05 (0.60) 5.37 (1.19) 6.25 (0.60) 5.87 (1.01) 6.23 (0.85) 5.77 (1.43) 5.82 (0.74) 5.62 (1.06)
Depressiona M (SD) 17.00 (11.30) 13.95 (13.08) 19.04 (9.36) 11.86 (7.36) 21.11 (11.22) 16.94 (11.82) 17.45 (6.97) 13.50 (9.97)
Anxietya M (SD) 12.09 (7.55) 11.45 (10.22) 10.78 (7.34) 8.96 (6.87) 12.50 (7.79) 12.11 (10.08) 14.95 (8.94) 11.41 (10.06)
Self-efficacyb M (SD) 18.50 (2.35) 18.91 (4.37) 17.13 (2.91) 18.00 (3.84) 18.77 (1.52) 19.77 (2.93) 17.14 (2.19) 17.76 (4.15)
Stressa M (SD) 8.96 (1.73) 6.80 (4.30) 8.91 (2.28) 5.91 (3.15) 9.40 (1.46) 8.06 (4.11) 8.45 (1.30) 6.23 (3.21)
Pain severitya M (SD) 4.21 (2.59) 3.56 (2.57) 3.85 (1.94) 3.12 (1.96) 3.97 (2.29) 3.63 (2.72) 4.28 (2.48) 4.60 (2.10)
Pain interferencea M (SD) 5.02 (2.90) 4.10 (3.36) 4.02 (2.82) 3.36 (2.74) 3.77 (3.19) 3.75 (3.14) 4.47 (2.76) 4.44 (2.79)
Quality of lifeb M (SD) 66.14 (15.01) 69.10 (18.99) 70.24 (14.69) 72.52 (10.84) 60.82 (16.43) 63.00 (13.86) 65.75 (19.32) 72.00 (19.70)
6 min walkb M (SD) 1346.35 (296.76) 1542.60 (634.11) 1389.50 (385.51) 1513.50 (270.95) 1335.27 (280.99) 1378.40 (208.92) 1317.78 (296.55) 1429.33 (286.19)
a Lower scores indicate better outcome
b Higher scores indicate better outcome
J Clin Psychol Med Settings (2007) 14:275–296 289
123
It should be mentioned that the changes in the present
trial were relatively modest and few participants experienced remission of illness. At the follow-up, there were no
significant changes across conditions in the number of
participants who were no longer classified as having CFS.
These results are consistent with conclusions from other
investigators, particularly those that have collected longer
term follow-up data. For example, when Deale, Husain,
Chalder, and Wessely (2001) conducted a five-year followup, only 23% of those provided with CBT said they had
completely recovered. Similar erosion occurred in the
Sharpe et al. (1996) investigation. In addition, in Van
Hoof’s (2004) critique of the Prins et al. (2001) CBT trial,
the treatment effects were no longer present after three
years.
Comparison of our findings with those of earlier studies
should not overlook differences in the samples. The current
sample was about 10 years older in age than the other
samples of patients with CFS in prominent clinical trials
that have reported relatively strong outcomes (Deale et al.,
1997; Powell et al., 2001; Prins et al., 2001; Sharpe et al.,
1996). In addition, the illness duration of our sample is
about 5 years longer than the others. Our sample also had
more people working and fewer people on disability than
the others. We also have fewer current comorbid psychological diagnoses in our sample than the samples in the
Sharpe et al. (1996) and Deale et al. (1997) articles. Our
sample had a higher mean Physical Functioning score at
baseline than the Powell et al. (2001) and Deale et al.
(1997) samples. It is possible that one of the reasons the
findings of the present study differ from some of the earlier
outcome studies of non-pharmacologic interventions is due
to the current sample at baseline being less physically
impaired, more likely to be in the work force, and having
Table 5 Summary statistics on Best Linear Unbiased Predictors for symptom outcomesA
Variables CBT COG ACT RELAX F-value
N Mean SE N Mean SE N Mean SE N Mean SE
Sore throat 22 0.22a 0.14 23 -0.64a 0.24 20 -0.17 0.06 22 -0.16 0.07 5.47**
Tender lymph nodes 22 0.06 0.13 24 -0.29 0.12 21 -0.23 0.08 21 0.108 0.09 3.43*
Muscle pain 23 -0.41a 0.07 24 -0.61bc 0.02 21 -0.20bd 0.14 23 -1.01acd 0.11 13.26***
Pain joints 22 -0.52ab 0.09 24 -0.97acd 0.05 21 -0.31ce 0.06 22 0.27bde 0.02 77.83***
Impaired memory 23 -0.60a 0.18 24 -0.72b 0.16 21 -0.28 0.24 22 0.09ab 0.05 4.66**
Unrefreshing sleep 23 -0.32 0.04 24 -0.53 0.13 21 -0.33 0.27 23 -0.88 0.16 2.60
Post-exertional malaise 23 -1.39a 0.04 22 -1.51b 0.25 21 -0.43ab 0.12 22 -1.02 0.25 6.25***
Headaches 23 -0.11ab 0.27 24 -0.25 0.21 21 -0.91a 0.12 23 -0.93b 0.05 5.35**
A Lower scores are better, i.e., a decrease in symptoms over time
In each row, cells with the same superscript are significantly different at the .05 level
* Significant at .05; ** Significant at .01; *** Significant at .001
Table 6 Means (and SD) for baseline and 12-month follow-up symptom outcomesa
Variables CBT COG ACT RELAX
Baseline 12 Month Baseline 12 Month Baseline 12 Month Baseline 12 Month
Sore throat M (SD) 24.76 (26.39) 26.43 (33.21) 17.96 (23.49) 10.00 (21.53) 17.78 (19.80) 13.61 (19.08) 23.43 (25.23) 20.95 (25.72)
Tender
lymph
nodes
M (SD) 33.25 (28.25) 32.00 (35.00) 19.13 (26.27) 16.09 (21.95) 25.79 (34.29) 20.79 (27.50) 18.13 (24.93) 19.75 (27.84)
Muscle pain M (SD) 63.75 (27.14) 57.50 (32.34) 53.61 (33.18) 40.83 (27.92) 56.71 (36.40) 54.11 (35.50) 60.52 (26.09) 41.36 (33.85)
Pain joints M (SD) 55.13 (39.46) 45.53 (42.62) 51.87 (31.04) 31.52 (30.47) 45.92 (38.16) 39.74 (41.18) 37.62 (37.57) 41.91 (34.73)
Impaired
memory
M (SD) 64.73 (25.07) 53.86 (27.03) 67.83 (24.35) 56.96 (26.27) 64.05 (21.82) 58.47 (29.84) 58.57 (25.11) 59.24 (26.37)
Unrefreshing
sleep
M (SD) 82.08 (22.51) 72.95 (27.11) 81.73 (17.24) 69.50 (27.98) 73.05 (27.49) 68.37 (30.86) 79.21 (14.09) 64.09 (31.50)
Postexertional
malaise
M (SD) 77.50 (24.19) 50.68 (31.67) 77.50 (16.47) 49.14 (38.68) 78.42 (15.19) 69.26 (24.63) 67.88 (14.08) 47.25 (36.11)
Headaches M (SD) 53.18 (33.69) 50.00 (37.26) 41.14 (32.88) 38.36 (39.26) 54.89 (34.23) 37.72 (36.33) 56.93 (31.87) 38.64 (31.86)
a Lower scores indicate better outcome
290 J Clin Psychol Med Settings (2007) 14:275–296
123
less psychiatric co-occurring disorders. If they were
healthier at the beginning of the study, and less likely to be
out of the workforce and on disability, it is possible that
some were over-extending themselves energy wise, and
thus they might have been more likely to benefit from
actually reducing their overall activities than increasing
them.
With regards to illness duration, Van der Werf, de Vree,
Alberts, van der Meer, and Bleijenberg (2002) found that
CFS patients with duration less than 15 months had a more
favorable outcome than those with a longer duration.
Although the average duration of the other non-pharmacologic studies exceeded 15 months, the average duration
in our study was still much longer. Along with work status,
this might be an important factor to consider when comparing our results to the other studies.
This study along with others suggests that some modest
improvements appear to occur over time for participants
with CFS provided non-pharmacologic interventions. A
model that helps explain why so many different types of
non-pharmacologic interventions could be somewhat
helpful to patients with CFS has been proposed by Miller
and Cohen (2001). They state that when individuals perceive a stressful experience as a significant threat and as
exceeding available coping resources, they have negative
emotional responses. These negative emotional responses
can cause patients to engage in behaviors (e.g., altering
sleep patterns, alcohol and tobacco use, decreasing physical activity), which conceivably modify immune responses.
In addition, negative emotional states might activate the
sympathetic division, whose fibers (descending from the
brain to lymphoid tissues such as bone marrow, thymus,
spleen, etc.) could release substances that influence
immune responses. Distress also can activate the HPA axis
and hormonal products from these systems can dysregulate
the immune system. What might be common to the
effective non-pharmacologic interventions, whether they
involve cognitive, behavioral or relaxation interventions, is
that they help patients reduce stress or allow patients to
better deal with stressors.
In addition, while CBT interventions have emphasized
cognitive and behavioral factors in the etiology and
maintenance of CFS (Vercoulen et al., 1998), the stereotype of patients with CFS being perfectionistic and having
negative attitudes toward psychiatry has not been supported (Wood & Wessely, 1999). Several investigators
have suggested that the central problem with patients
experiencing CFS is a psychosomatic preoccupation with
one’s fatigue (Vercoulen et al., 1998), but Song and
Jason’s (2005) empirical investigation could not find support for this model. Other approaches to psychotherapy,
including Cognitive Coping Skills Therapy (Friedberg &
Krupp, 1994), Envelope Theory (Jason et al., 1999), a
consumer driven rehabilitation program (Taylor, Jason,
Shiraishi, Schoeny, & Keller, 2006), pacing (Goudsmit,
2001), and pacing plus graded exercise (Wallman, Morton,
Goodman, Grove, & Guilfoyle, 2004) do not challenge or
question patients’ beliefs in regards to the cause of CFS, as
occurs within some CBT interventions. Instead, these
treatments espouse a biopsychosocial approach, which
acknowledge biological, psychological, and psychosocial
contributions to the expression of the illness.
Table 7 12-Month follow-up
participant and clinician ratings
* p\.05
In each row, cells with the same
superscript differ significantly at
the .01 level
CBT (%) COG (%) ACT (%) RELAX (%)
Participant ratings
I feel—Satisfied by the treatment
Satisfied–very satisfied 86 86 84 74
Dissatisfied 14 14 16 26
I found the treatment I received
Useful–very useful 91 86 84 72
Not useful 9 14 16 28
Treatment made me feel
Better–much improved 78 64 48 42
Worse–unchanged 22 36 52 58
Level of Improvement*
Improved–much improved–very much improved 86ab 64 40a 47b
Much worse–worse–no change 14 36 60 53
Clinician ratings
Patients improvement in overall functioning has
Improved–much improved–very much improved 67 68 35 41
Very much worse–much worse–worse–no change 33 32 65 59
J Clin Psychol Med Settings (2007) 14:275–296 291
123
Given the general positive effects of all the conditions in
the present trial, there seems to be considerable merit in
further studying approaches that tend to be better accepted
by patient groups. These types of non-pharmacologic
interventions deal with cognitive restructuring, coping
skills, provision of psychological support, and illness
education. Results from this study fit well with the latter
model of non-pharmacologic interventions as tools to
enhance illness management, as this investigation found
few rates of full recovery. Other investigations have found
somewhat similar non-pharmacologic treatment techniques
can assist with illness management of diseases such as
breast cancer and HIV/AIDS, and these types of interventions may also affect immunological status (Antoni et al.,
2006; McGregor et al., 2004. Thus, these non-pharmacologic therapies might be considered an important
management tool that can be utilized as part of a comprehensive plan of medical and psychological treatment for
patients with CFS.
While all of the treatments were found to be of modest
benefit for individuals with CFS, the COG condition
exhibited the most beneficial changes for depression and
pain in joints, when compared to the other three treatment
conditions. The study results suggest that cognitive therapies, which focus on modifying unhelpful or negativistic
illness cognitions and facilitate the use of active, constructive coping skills, might be most effective for treating
depression and pain in joints. In addition, this condition
had more favorable change when compared to at least one
other condition for the following outcomes: physical
functioning, pain severity, sore throats, muscle pain, pain
in joints, impaired memory, and post-exertional malaise
(although for pain severity and impaired memory, these
findings were due to comparing the COG to the RELAX
condition which evidenced worsening over time). There
were several important differences between the CBT and
COG therapies in that the COG intervention placed more
emphasis on pacing of activities when compared to the
CBT treatment. Indeed in the COG therapy, individuals
were not instructed to engage in regular amounts of
activity, and were not encouraged to engage in regular or
sustained physical activity. It is possible that pacing of
activity, which puts a strong emphasis on becoming aware
of total available energy, managing energy, and not going
beyond one’s energy limits, may lead to the higher
improvements seen in the post-exertional malaise and,
ultimately, to better overall physical functioning.
When the authors had initially designed the study, it was
hypothesized that the RELAX condition would actually
serve as the control condition. However, in an effort to
insure that patients attended an equivalent number of sessions as the other conditions, RELAX was considerably
strengthened with a variety of activities, and in the end,
became an independent treatment rather than a control
condition. Surprisingly, the RELAX group showed stronger relative improvements in anxiety when compared to the
CBT group. It might have been anticipated that the cognitive restructuring component of the CBT group would
more effectively address negative mood. However, the
RELAX group included relaxation techniques that
decreased muscle tension, improved bodily awareness, and
encouraged mild stretching. It might be that addressing
anxiety through active relaxation techniques are an effective behavioral intervention for addressing anxious mood
in people with CFS. It is also of interest that the largest
gains in self-efficacy occurred for the RELAX condition,
particularly when compared to the ACT condition. The
RELAX group also had the greatest reductions in muscle
pain than any of the other conditions. Regarding headaches, both the RELAX group and the ACT group had
more significant overall positive change in headache
severity compared to the CBT condition. It might be
expected that relaxation could reduce muscle pain. In
addition, relaxation and anaerobic physical activities might
have decreased headache severity, as headaches sometimes
are caused by muscle tension or by negative emotional
mood, which were also affected in these two conditions. It
should be noted that for the RELAX condition, negative
change over time did occur for pain severity, tender lymph
nodes, pain in joints, and impaired memory. It is a bit
unclear why RELAX would have been effective for the
muscle pain and headache symptoms but not in other areas
where pain is felt. Still, besides these measures, when
inspecting change scores for the RELAX condition, on
most measures the changes were in positive directions.
Data from employment status and satisfaction were
generally similar to the findings above. There were few
significant differences for employment or the participant
and clinician ratings among the four conditions at the 12-
month follow-up. In general, participants in all four conditions were generally satisfied with the non-pharmacologic
treatments and found them to be useful (with ratings in the
70–90%). While participants seemed to have been satisfied
with the treatments and found them to be useful, individuals
were less likely to indicate that these treatments made them
feel better; and clinician ratings of improvements were also
generally lower than the treatment satisfaction ratings.
Regarding differential effects, significantly higher ratings of
level of improvement were found for the CBT condition
than the ACT or RELAX conditions. The CBT condition
also had directionally more changes in employment than the
other conditions. This may be because the CBT intervention
incorporated a range of cognitive and behavioral/activity
interventions; and exposure to a wider array of treatment
techniques might have been perceived as more acceptable
and more helpful to individuals in this group.
292 J Clin Psychol Med Settings (2007) 14:275–296
123
Previous findings from participant questionnaires and
some non-pharmacologic clinical trials regarding the
acceptability of non-pharmacologic treatments have produced mixed results. For example, a survey of 3,228
respondents (Preliminary Report, 2001) and a separate
survey sponsored by the ME Association (Cooper, 2001)
found that graded exercise was felt to be the type of
treatment that made more people with CFS worse than any
other. Edmonds et al. (2004) reviewed randomized controlled trials of using exercise, and concluded that these
treatments are less acceptable to patients than other
approaches such as rest and pacing. Recent findings suggest that there might be some patients who are particularly
sensitive to exercise exertion, particularly of the aerobic
type, and it was for this reason that the present study
selected an anaerobic type of exercise. While in healthy
controls, exercise increases pain threshold by releasing
endogenous opioids and growth factors, individuals with
CFS have reductions in pain threshold after modest exercise (Whiteside, Hansen, & Chaudhuri, 2004). Peckerman
et al. (2003) have suggested that there might be left ventricular dysfunction in the heart of some patients with CFS,
and lower cardiac output could make it difficult for patients
to exercise. Black, O’Connor, and McCully (2005) found
that 28% on average increases in daily physical activity for
a 4-week period among a sample of people with CFS
resulted in worsening overall mood, muscle pain intensity,
and time spent each day with fatigue. Black and McCully
(2005) concluded that patients with CFS developed exercise intolerance as demonstrated by reduced total activity
after 4–10 days. Clearly, clinicians and investigators need
to closely monitior potentially iatrogenic effects of interventions, and such assessments might help researchers
better determine which non-pharmacologic interventions
are best delivered to patients with CFS.
Limitations and Summary
There were several limitations in the present study. The
sample size for each condition was relatively small, and it
is important to attempt to replicate the findings with larger
samples. In addition, because there were a large number of
measures, some of the significant contrasts could have
occurred by chance. Also, individuals with CFS comprise a
heterogeneous group. Indeed, subgrouping of individuals
with CFS has been recommended in recent research.
Unfortunately, due to the small sample size of each treatment condition, subgrouping of individuals based on their
particular cluster of symptoms was not possible. In addition, future studies need to collect data concerning whether
the treatments and suggested behavior change actually
occur outside of the sessions.
Furthermore, our current study provides just data from
the post-testing, 6- and 12-month follow-up. Clearly,
longer-term follow-up studies are needed before we can
draw any firm conclusions on the effectiveness of these
non-pharmacologic interventions (Chambers, Bagnall,
Hempel, & Forbes, 2006). The absence of a control group
also makes it more difficult to know whether changes over
time might have occurred in the absence of any interventions. In addition, it is possible that getting the attention
of being in the present study might have been therapeutic
in itself. However, Cho, Hotopf, and Wessely (2005)
reviewed all controlled trials with patients with CFS, and
found a pooled placebo response of 19.6%, which is a
relatively low placebo response. Relaxation or standard
medical care had a low placebo response (14%), oral placebos had a medium placebo response (16.5%), and
injected placebos had a high placebo response (24%).
These data suggest that patients with CFS have a low rate
of spontaneous remission.
In summary, these findings suggest mixed results for
these treatment strategies. Modest treatment effects were
found for each treatment conditions, and no one treatment
strategy was clearly superior to another treatment strategy
in all areas. Commonalities across the conditions may have
tended to outweigh or mute the impact of differences
across conditions. Specifically, the ‘‘general therapeutic
skills’’ in Table 2 appear to have been shared across all
conditions. In addition, the overlap between the CBT and
COG conditions as reflected in the COG questions in
Table 2 may have also reduced differences between these
conditions. Further, there was low recovery from the illness, and this is in contrast to results from efficacy trials of
cognitive behavioral therapies for CFS. Instead, the results
suggest that these different treatment techniques may have
modest, differential effects on the symptoms of CFS and
individualizing a person’s treatment might make sense. For
example, individuals whose symptoms include depression
might benefit from a cognitive coping skills therapy,
whereas individuals with high levels of headaches might
benefit most from relaxation techniques. However, more
research should be done in order to validate the utility of
these specific recommendations for treatment of patients
with CFS with different symptom presentations.
Acknowledgment The authors appreciate the funding provided by
NIAID (Grant No. AI 49720). We also particularly appreciate the
help of Staci Stevens and Vincent Deary for their consultation help.
References
Akagi, H., Klimes, I., & Bass, C. (2001). Cognitive behavioral
therapy for chronic fatigue syndrome in a general hospital—
feasible and effective. General Hospital Psychiatry, 23,
254–260.
J Clin Psychol Med Settings (2007) 14:275–296 293
123
Antoni, M. H., Lutgendorf, S., Cole, S., Dhabhar, F., Sephton, S.,
McDonald, P., Stefanek, M., & Sood, A. (2006). The influence of
biobehavioral factors on tumor biology, pathways and mechanisms. Nature Reviews Cancer, 6, 240–248.
Antoni, M. H., & Weiss, D. E. (2003). Stress and immunity. In L. A.
Jason, P. A. Fennell, & R. R. Taylor (Eds.), Handbook of chronic
fatigue syndrome (pp. 527–545). Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons.
Bazelmans, E., Prins, J. B., Lulofs, R., van der Meer, J. W. M., &
Bleijenberg, G. (2005). Cognitive behaviour group therapy for
chronic fatigue syndrome. A nonrandomized waiting list
controlled study. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 74,
218–224.
Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Manual for the
Beck Depression Inventory-II. San Antonio: Psychological
Corporation.
Black, C. D., O’Connor, P. J., & McCully, K. K. (2005). Increased
daily physical activity and fatigue symptoms in chronic fatigue
syndrome. Dynamic Medicine, 4, 3. doi: 10;1186/1476-5918-4-3.
Black, C. D., & McCully, K. K. (2005). Time course of exercise
induced alterations in daily activity in chronic fatigue syndrome.
Dynamic Medicine, 4, 10. doi: 10.1186/1476-5918-4-10.
Buchwald, D., Pearlman, T., Umali, J., Schmaling, K., & Katon, W.
(1996). Functional status in patients with chronic fatigue
syndrome, other fatiguing illnesses, and healthy individuals.
American Journal of Medicine, 101, 364–370.
Burckhardt, C. S., & Anderson, K. L. (2003). The Quality of Life
Scale (QOLS): Reliability, validity, and utilization. Health and
Quality of Life Outcomes, 1, 60.
Butland, R. J. A., Pang, J., Gross, E. R., Woodcock, A. A., & Geddes,
D. M. (1982). Two, six, and 12-minute walking tests in
respiratory disease. British Medical Journal, 284, 1607–1608.
Chambers, D., Bagnall, A. M., Hempel, S., & Forbes, C. (2006).
Interventions for the treatment, management and rehabilitation
of patients with chronic fatigue syndrome/myaglic encephalomyelitis: An updated systemic review. Journal of the Royal
Society of Medicine, 99, 506–520.
Chalder, T., Berelowitz, G., Pawlikowska, J., Watts, L., & Wessely,
D. (1993). Development of a fatigue scale. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 37, 147–153.
Chengalur, S. N., Smith, G. A., Nelson, R. C., & Sadoff, A. M.
(1990). Assessing sincerity of effort in maximal grip strength
tests. American Journal of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 69, 148–153.
Cho, H. J., Hotopf, M., & Wessely, S. (2005). The placebo response
in the treatment of chronic fatigue syndrome. A systematic
review and meta-analysis. Psychosomatic Medicine, 67,
301–313.
Clapp, L. L., Richardson, M. T., Smith, J. F., Wang, M., Clapp, A. J.,
& Pieroni, R. E. (1999). Acute effects of thirty minutes of lightintensity, intermittent exercise on patients with chronic fatigue
syndrome. Physical Therapy, 79, 749–756.
Cleeland, C. S., & Ryan, K. M. (1994). Pain assessment: The global
use of the Brief Pain Inventory. Annals Academy of Medicine
Singapore, 23, 129–138.
Cohen, S., Kamark, T., & Mermelstein, R. (1983). A global measure
of perceived stress. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 37,
147–153.
Cooper, L. (2001). Report on survey of members of local ME groups.
Perspectives.
Deale, A., Chalder, T., Marks, I., & Wessely, S. (1997). Cognitive
behaviour therapy for chronic fatigue syndrome: A randomized
controlled trial. American Journal of Psychiatry, 154, 408–414.
Deale, A., Husain, K., Chalder, T., & Wessely, S. (2001). Long-term
outcome of cognitive behavior therapy versus relaxation therapy
for chronic fatigue syndrome: A 5-year follow-up study.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 2038–2042.
Donta, S. T., Clauw, D. J., Engel, C. C., Guarino, P., Peduzzi, P.,
Williams, D. A., et al. (2003). Cognitive behavioral therapy and
aerobic exercise for Gulf war veterans’ illnesses: A randomized
controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical Association,
289, 1396–1404.
Edmonds, M., McGuire, H., & Price, J. (2004). Exercise therapy for
chronic fatigue syndrome. The Cochrane Library, 3, 1–22.
Fennell, P. A. (1995). A four stage progressive model of CFS. Journal
of Chronic Fatigue Syndrome, 1, 69–79.
Ferguson, R. J., Robinson, A. B., & Splaine, M. (2002). Use of the
Reliable Change Index to evaluate clinical significance in SF-36
outcomes. Quality of Life Research, 11, 509–516.
Friedberg, F. (1996). Chronic fatigue syndrome: A new clinical
application. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice,
27, 487–494.
Friedberg, F., & Jason, L. A. (1998). Understanding chronic fatigue
syndrome: An empirical guide to assessment and treatment.
Washington: American Psychological Association.
Friedberg, F., & Krupp, L. B. (1994). A comparison of cognitive
behavioral treatment for chronic fatigue syndrome and primary
depression. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 18, 105–110.
Fukuda, K., Straus, S. E., Hickie, I., Sharpe, M. C., Dobbins, J. G., &
Komaroff, A. (1994). The chronic fatigue syndrome: A comprehensive approach to its definition and study. Annals of
Internal Medicine, 121, 953–959.
Fulcher, K. Y., & White, P. D. (1997). Randomized controlled trial of
graded exercise in patients with the chronic fatigue syndrome.
British Medical Journal, 314, 1647–1652.
Gabbe, B. J., Bennell, K. L., Wajswelner, H., & Finch, C. F. (2004).
Reliability of common lower extremity musculoskeletal screening tests. Physical Therapy in Sport, 5, 90–97.
Goudsmit, E. (2001). Measuring the quality of trials of treatments for
chronic fatigue syndrome. Journal of the American Medical
Association, 286, 3078–3079.
Gould, R., Abramson, I., Galasko, D., & Salmon, D. (2001). Rate of
cognitive change in Alzheimer’s disease: Methodological
approaches using random effects models. Journal of the
International Neuropsychological Society, 7, 813–824.
Hawk, C., Jason, L. A., & Torres-Harding, S. (2007). Reliability of a
chronic fatigue syndrome questionnaire. Journal of Chronic
Fatigue Syndrome, 13, 41–66.
Hewitt, P. L., & Norton, G. R. (1993). The Beck Anxiety
Inventory: A psychometric analysis. Psychological Assessment,
5, 408–412.
Huibers, M. J. H., Beurskens, A. J. H. M., van Schayck, C. P.,
Bazelmans, E., Metsemakers, J. F. M., Knottnerus, J. A., et al.
(2004). Efficacy of cognitive-behavioral therapy by general
practitioners for unexplained fatigue among employees. The
British Journal of Psychiatry, 184, 240–246.
Innes, E. (1999). Handgrip strength testing: A review of the literature.
Australian Occupational Therapy Journal, 46, 120–140.
Jason, L. A., Melrose, H., Lerman, A., Burroughs, V., Lewis, K.,
King, C. P., et al. (1999). Managing chronic fatigue syndrome: A
case study. AAOHN Journal, 47, 17–21.
Jason, L. A., Ropacki, J. A., Santoro, N. B., Richman, J. A.,
Heatherly, W., Taylor, R., et al. (1997). A screening scale for
chronic fatigue syndrome: Reliability and validity. Journal of
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome, 3, 39–59.
Jensen, M. P., & Karoly, P. (1992). Self-report scales and procedures
for assessing pain in adults. In D. C. Turk & R. Melzack (Eds.),
Handbook of pain assessment (pp. 135–151). New York:
Guilford Press.
Johnson, S. K., DeLuca, J., & Natelson, B. (1996). Depression in
fatiguing illness: Comparing patients with chronic fatigue
syndrome, multiple sclerosis and depression. Journal of Affective
Disorders, 39, 21–30.
294 J Clin Psychol Med Settings (2007) 14:275–296
123
Keller, S., Bann, C. M., Dodd, S. L., Schein, J., Mendoza, T. R., &
Cleeland, C. S. (2004). Validity of the Brief Pain Inventory for
use in documenting the outcomes of patients with noncancer
pain. The Clinical Journal of Pain, 20, 309–318.
Komaroff, A. L., Fagioli, L. R., Geiger, A. M., Doolittle, T. H., Lee,
J., Kornish, R. J., et al. (1996). An examination of the working
case definition of chronic fatigue syndrome. American Journal of
Medicine, 100, 56–64.
Krupp, L. B., LaRocca, N. G., Muir-Nash, J., & Steinberg, A. D.
(1989). The Fatigue Severity Scale: Application to patents with
multiple sclerosis and systemic Lupus erythematosus. Archives
of Neurology, 46, 1121–1123.
Laird, N., & Ware, J. (1982). Random-effects models for longitudinal
data. Biometrics, 38, 963–974.
McGregor, B., Antoni, M., Boyers, A., Alferi, S., Blomberg, B.,
Carver, C. (2004). Cognitive–behavioral stress management
increases benefit finding and immune function among women
with early-stage breast cancer. Journal of Psychosomatic
Research, 56, 1–8.
McHorney, C. A., Ware, J. E., Lu, A. W., & Sherbourne, C. D.
(1994). The MOS 36-item Short-Form Health Survey (SF-36):
III. Tests of data quality, scaling assumptions, and reliability
across diverse patient groups. Medical Care, 32, 40–66.
McKenzie, M., Dechene, L., Friedberg, F., & Fontanetta, R. (1995).
Cognitive-behavioral coping skills in long-term chronic fatigue
syndrome. Journal of Chronic Fatigue Syndrome, 1, 59–67.
Miller, G. E., & Cohen, S. (2001). Psychological interventions and the
immune system: A meta-analytic review and critique. Health
Psychology, 20, 47–63.
Ost, L. (1987). Applied relaxation: Description of a coping technique
and review of controlled studies. Behavior Research and
Therapy, 25, 397–409.
Peckerman, A., LaManca, J. J., Dahl, K. A., Chemitiganti, R.,
Qureishi, B., & Natelson, B. H. (2003). Abnormal impedance
cardiography predicts symptom severity in chronic fatigue
syndrome. The American Journal of the Medical Sciences,
326, 55–60.
Pepper, C. M., Krupp, L. B., Friedberg, F., Doscher, C., & Coyle, P.
K. (1993). A comparison of neuropsychiatric characteristics in
chronic fatigue syndrome, multiple sclerosis, and major depression. The Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical
Neurosciences, 5, 200–205.
Powell, P., Bentall, R. P., Nye, F. J., & Edwards, R. H. T. (2001).
Randomized controlled trial of patient education to encourage
exercise in chronic fatigue syndrome. British Medical Journal,
322, 1–5.
Powell, P., Bentall, R. P., Nye, F. J., & Edwards, R. H. T. (2004).
Patient education to encourage graded exercise in chronic fatigue
syndrome – 2-year follow-up randomized controlled trial. The
British Journal of Psychiatry, 184, 142–146.
Preliminary Report. (2001). The severely affected. AfME, Feb., 28,
2001.
Prins, J. B., Bleijenberg, G., Bazelmans, E., Elving, L. D., De Boo, T.
M., Severens, J. L., et al. (2001). Cognitive behaviour therapy for
chronic fatigue syndrome: A multicenter randomized controlled
trial. Lancet, 357, 841–847.
Ridsdale, L., Godfrey, E., Chalder, T., Seed, P., King, M., Wallace,
P., et al. (2001). Chronic fatigue in general practice: Is
counseling as good as cognitive behaviour therapy? A randomized trial. British Journal of General Practice, 51, 19–24.
Ridsdale, L., Darbishire, L., & Seed, P. (2004). Is graded exercise
better than cognitive behavior therapy for fatigue? A UK
randomized trial in primary care. Psychological Medicine, 34,
37–49.
Robinson, G. K. (1991). The BLUP is a good thing: The estimation of
random effects. Statistical Science, 6, 15–51.
Severens, J. L., Prins, J. B., Van Wilt, G. J. Van Meer, J. W. M., &
Bleijenberg, G. (2004). Cost-effectiveness of cognitive behavior
therapy for patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. Quarterly
Journal of Medicine, 97, 153–161.
Sharpe, M., Hawton, K., Simkin, S., Surawy, C., Hackmann, A.,
Klimes, I., et al. (1996). Cognitive behavior therapy for the
chronic fatigue syndrome: A randomized controlled trial. British
Medical Journal, 312, 22–26.
Soderberg, S., & Evengard, B. (2001). Short-term group therapy for
patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. Psychotherapy Psychosomatics, 70, 108–111.
Song, S., & Jason, L. A. (2005). A population-based study of chronic
fatigue syndrome (CFS) experienced in differing patient groups:
An effort to replicate Vercoulen et al.’s model of CFS. Journal
of Mental Health, 14, 277–289.
Spitzer, R. L., Williams, J. B. W., Gibbon, M., & First, M. B. (1995).
Structured Clinical Interview for the DSM-IV—non-patient
edition (SCID—NP, version 2.0). Washington: American Psychiatric Press.
Steer, R. A., Clark, D. A., Beck, A. T., & Ranieri, W. F. (1995).
Common and specific dimensions of self-reported anxiety and
depression: A replication. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 104,
542–545.
Surawy, C., Hackmann, A., Hawton, K., & Sharpe, M. (1995).
Chronic fatigue syndrome: A cognitive approach. Behavior
Research Therapy, 33, 535–544.
Taylor, R. R., & Jason, L. A. (1998). Comparing the DIS with the
SCID: Chronic fatigue syndrome and psychiatric comorbidity.
Psychology and Health: The International Review of Health
Psychology, 13, 1087–1104.
Taylor, R. R., Jason, L. A., Shiraishi, Y., Schoeny, M. E., & Keller, J.
(2006). Conservation of resources theory, perceived stress, and
chronic fatigue syndrome: Outcomes of a consumer-driven
rehabilitation program. Rehabilitation Psychology, 51, 157–165.
Taylor, R. R., Jason, L. A., & Torres, A. (2000). Fatigue rating
scales: An empirical comparison. Psychological Medicine, 30,
849–856.
Van der Werf, S. P., de Vree, B., Alberts, M., van der Meer, J. W. M.,
& Bleijenberg, G. (2002). Natural course and predicting selfreported improvement in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome
with a relatively short illness duration. Journal of Psychosomatic
Research, 53, 749–753.
Van Hoof, E. (2004). Cognitive behavioral therapy as cure-all for
CFS. Journal of Chronic Fatigue Syndrome, 11, 43–47.
Vercoulen, J. H., Swanink, C. M., Galama, J. M., Fennis, J. F.,
Jongen, P. J., Hommes, O. R., et al. (1998). The persistence of
fatigue in chronic fatigue syndrome and multiple sclerosis:
Development of a model. Journal of Psychosomatic Research,
45, 507–517.
Wallman, K. E., Morton, A. R., Goodman, C., Grove, R., &
Guilfoyle, A. M. (2004). Randomised controlled trial of graded
exercise in chronic fatigue syndrome. The Medical Journal of
Australia, 180, 444–448.
Ware, J. E., & Sherbourne, C. D. (1992). The MOS 36-item shortform health survey. Medical Care, 30, 473–483.
Wearden, A. J., Morriss, R. K., Mullis, R., Strickland, P. L., Pearson,
D. J., & Appleby, L. (1998). Randomised, double-blind, placebocontrolled treatment trial of fluoxetine and graded exercise for
chronic fatigue syndrome. The British Journal of Psychiatry,
172, 485–490.
White, P. D., Sharpe, M. C., Chalder, T., DeCesare, J. C., & Walwyn,
R. (2007). Protocol for the PACE trial: A randomised controlled
trial of adaptive pacing, cognitive behaviour therapy, and graded
exercise, as supplements to standardised specialist medical care
versus standardised specialist medical care alone for patients
with the chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis or
J Clin Psychol Med Settings (2007) 14:275–296 295
123
encephalopathy. BMC Neurology, 7, 6. doi: 10.1186/1471-
2377-7-6.
Whitehead, L., & Campion, P. (2002). Can general practitioners
manage chronic fatigue syndrome? A controlled trial. Journal of
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome, 10, 55–64.
Whiteside, A., Hansen, S., & Chaudhuri, A. (2004). Exercise lowers
pain threshold in chronic fatigue syndrome. Pain, 109, 497–499.
Whiting, P., Bagnall, A. M., Sowden, A. J., Cornell, J. E., Mulrow, C.
D., & Ramirez, G. (2001). Interventions for the treatment and
management of chronic fatigue syndrome. Journal of the
American Medical Association, 286, 1360–1368.
Wood, B., & Wessely, S. (1999). Personality and social attitudes in
chronic fatigue syndrome. Journal of Psychosomatic Research,
47, 385–397.
296 J Clin Psychol Med Settings (2007) 14:275–296
123