Instruments and techniques
Evaluation of a new surgical approach for the treatment of
clomiphene citrate-resistant infertility in polycystic ovary
syndrome: Laparoscopic ovarian multi-needle intervention
Hakan Kaya, MD, Mekin Sezik, MD, and Okan Ozkaya, MD
From the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Suleyman Demirel University, School of Medicine, Isparta, Turkey
(all authors).
Abstract. Laparoscopic ovarian drilling (LOD) is the accepted second-line treatment for clomiphene citrateresistant anovulatory infertility in polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). Although multiple pregnancy rates are
reduced with ovarian drilling procedures, postoperative adhesion formation is a potential complication in up to
85% of the women subjected to laparoscopic destructive ovarian procedures. Our objective was to determine the
effectiveness of a new, specially designed laparoscopic device and technique that might enable treatment for
patients with anovulatory PCOS with less trauma and fewer postoperative adhesions. Thirty-five infertile clomiphene citrate-resistant women with PCOS were included. Seventeen women underwent laparoscopic ovarian
multi-needle intervention (LOMNI), and 18 women received step-up ovulation induction treatment with recombinant follicle-stimulating hormone followed by intrauterine insemination for three cycles. Patients were followed
for a period of 6 months after either laparoscopic surgery or the initiation of ovulation induction therapy. Outcome
measures were cycle regularity, pregnancy rate, safety, postoperative adhesion formation, and cost effectiveness.
There were no significant differences between the two groups in terms of age, body-mass index, duration of
infertility, and basal cycle-day 2 hormone levels. Significant improvement in cycle regularity (p .01) was found
after LOMNI. Cumulative pregnancy rates (35.3% in the LOMNI group vs 33.3% in the ovulation induction
group) did not differ between the groups. No adverse events following surgery were noted. Moderate ovarian
hyperstimulation syndrome and multiple pregnancies occurred in four and two patients, respectively, in the
ovulation induction group. Eight nonpregnant women in the LOMNI group underwent repeat laparoscopy at the
end of the follow-up period. No adhesion formation attributable to LOMNI was observed in any of those eight
women. The cost of LOMNI was significantly (p .001) lower than the ovulation induction treatment. In
conclusion, LOMNI may be a safe, inexpensive, and effective procedure for the treatment of CC-resistant
infertility in patients with PCOS. It seems to preserve the beneficial effects and probably omits unwanted effects
(such as adhesion formation) of LOD.
© 2005 AAGL. All rights reserved.
KEYWORDS:
Polycystic ovary
syndrome;
Laparoscopic ovarian
drilling;
Clomiphene-resistant
infertility;
Anovulatory cycles
A gold standard treatment algorithm for clomiphene citrate (CC)-resistant polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) has
not been established. Several explanations for failure to
respond to CC include precocious or impaired oocyte maturation secondary to excessive luteinizing hormone (LH)
secretion in the follicular phase, premature luteinization
following an untimely LH surge, increased follicle atresia,
and variable implantation rates.1 Induction of ovulation with
exogenous gonadotropins has some shortcomings, such as
increased risk of cycle cancellations, ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS), and multiple pregnancies. The supplemental use of gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists
Presented at the 20th annual meeting of the European Society of Human
Reproduction and Embryology, Berlin, Germany, June 27–30, 2004.
Corresponding author: Hakan Kaya, MD, Suleyman Demirel University, School of Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 32100
Isparta, Turkey.
E-mail: drhakankaya2002@yahoo.com
Submitted December 15, 2004. Accepted for publication March 25,
2005.
1553-4650/$ -see front matter © 2005 AAGL. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jmig.2005.05.017
Journal of Minimally Invasive Gynecology (2005) 12, 355-358
or antagonists and metformin has been proposed to avoid
these detrimental effects.1–3 However, some women will not
respond to such supplemental therapy, and the risk of multiple pregnancies is not thoroughly eliminated.
Laparoscopic treatment of patients with PCOS who fail
to ovulate with CC can result in spontaneous ovulation. This
therapy can be performed at the time of a planned diagnostic
laparoscopy in a patient with known anovulation and polycystic ovaries.1 The mechanism may involve reduction in
ovarian androgen production through decrease in stromal
mass or disruption of parenchymal blood flow.4 Laparoscopic ovarian drilling (LOD) has been used as a secondline treatment for CC-resistant PCOS as the modern equivalent of the original ovarian wedge resection.1 However,
LOD may be associated with decreased ovarian reserve in
the long term.4 Increased periovarian adhesions that might
potentially interfere with fertility are another problem.4–7
In the current study, we present our experience with a
specially designed device and new technique for laparoscopic treatment of CC-resistant PCOS. We evaluated the
outcomes of this procedure, laparoscopic ovarian multineedle intervention (LOMNI), after a 6-month-period. We
also investigated pelvic adhesion formation in a subset of
women in the postoperative period.
Materials and methods
Thirty-five infertile CC-resistant women with PCOS were
prospectively evaluated from January 2000 through January
2004. All women had anovulatory infertility of greater than
1 year’s duration. Women with a history of abdominopelvic
surgery (including any laparoscopic interventions), any systemic disease, proven or suspected pelvic inflammatory
disease, or ectopic pregnancy had been excluded. Resistance to CC was considered when mature follicle (14 mm
in diameter) development on serial transvaginal ultrasonographic folliculometry was not observed following treatment with CC on cycle-day 5 to 9 at up to 200 mg/day
doses. Polycystic ovary syndrome was diagnosed by hormonal (cycle-day 2 LH/follicle-stimulating hormone [FSH]
ratio 2) and ultrasound (ovarian stromal hypertrophy accompanied by multiple 4- to10-mm follicles in periphery)
parameters. The study was subject to approval by the institutional review board, and patient consent was obtained
before all surgical interventions. Candidates were allocated
into two groups using sealed opaque envelopes in a computer-generated random sequence: 17 women underwent
LOMNI, and 18 women received step-up ovulation induction treatment with recombinant FSH followed by intrauterine insemination for three cycles.
Laparoscopic ovarian multi-needle intervention was performed as follows. Under general anesthesia, the patient
was prepared for laparoscopic surgery in the usual manner.
The patient’s legs were placed in frog-leg position. A 10-cm
Veres needle was placed through the anterior abdominal
wall at the lower margin of the umbilicus. Pneumoperitoneum was established with approximately 4 L of CO2. An
operating laparoscope was inserted following umbilical trocar insertion, and a 5-mm single ancillary port was placed in
the midline suprapubic area. After careful inspection of the
pelvis, both ovaries and tubes were fully visualized and
mobilized from surrounding structures using a blunt probe.
A specially designed laparoscopic instrument (Kaya laparoscopic drilling device; Aygun Medical Devices Limited
Company, Samsun, Turkey) was inserted through the 5-mm
ancillary port. This instrument is 37 cm long with a distal
grasper-like tip containing two prongs (Figure 1). Each
prong is 25  4 mm in area and consists of 10 needle-like
teeth, which are 2 mm in length and 0.4 mm in diameter
(Figure 2). The maximum opening distance achieved between the two rows of teeth is 30 mm. Ovarian tissue was
placed between the jaws of the instrument and squeezed by
applying some force. The instrument was slipped over to the
neighboring untreated ovarian tissue, its jaws closed again,
and consequently the entire ovarian surface was subjected to
this procedure. Any systems that yield energy such as electrocautery or laser were not used. The contralateral ovary
was also similarly treated.
Step-up protocol for induction of ovulation with exogenous recombinant gonadotropins1 and ovulation stimulation
using recombinant human chorionic gonadotropin1 (HCG)
were carried out. Intrauterine insemination with the use of
Figure 1 Panoramic view of the specially designed instrument.
Figure 2 Close-up view of the instrument showing its prongs
and needle-like millimetric teeth. Ovarian tissue is squeezed between the jaws.
356 Journal of Minimally Invasive Gynecology, Vol 12, No 4, July/August 2005
sperm washing and swim-up techniques1 was performed 36
hours after the injection of HCG.
All women were followed for a period of 6 months after
either laparoscopic surgery or the initiation of ovulation
induction treatment. Our outcome measures were cycle regularity, clinical pregnancy rate, safety (multiple pregnancy
and OHSS), postoperative adhesion formation, and cost
effectiveness. Clinical pregnancy was confirmed when an
intrauterine gestational sac was observed. Menstrual cycles
were considered regular if the time interval between each
cycle was 21 to 35 days with no breakthrough bleeding.
Eight nonpregnant women in the intervention group underwent repeat laparoscopy after the end of the follow-up
period. Couples without male factor infertility were offered
gamete intrafallopian transfer (GIFT), and diagnostic laparoscopy was performed as part of the GIFT technique. The
ovaries and paraovarian areas were carefully inspected during repeat laparoscopy for any adhesion formation.
Data are presented as mean  standard deviation or
frequencies; and 2 contingency table analysis and MannWhitney U test were used to compare categorical and continuous variables, respectively. A p value .05 was considered significant.
Results
There were no significant differences between the groups in
terms of baseline characteristics (Table 1). One woman in
the LOMNI group and two women in the ovulation induction group were lost to follow-up. However, the pregnancy
tests of these three women were available. They were also
interviewed by telephone at the end of the follow-up period
for the occurrence of a pregnancy. Comparisons of outcome
measures between the groups are given in Table 2. Laparoscopic ovarian multi-needle intervention was associated
with improved cycle regularity and decreased incidence of
OHSS. Clinical pregnancy rate was comparable with no
significant difference. Any short-term surgical morbidity
was not observed except superficial ovarian bleeding in one
patient. Brief bipolar coagulation onto the ovarian surface
was sufficient to manage the bleeding.
Eight nonpregnant women in the LOMNI group underwent repeat laparoscopy after the end of the follow-up
period. No adhesion formation was observed in any of these
women.
Discussion
Laparoscopic treatment of polycystic ovarian disease that is
unresponsive to treatment with CC can be accomplished by
multiple ovarian punch biopsy, ovarian electrocauterization,
laser vaporization, or photo-coagulation.8 Cumulative ongoing pregnancy rates in women with PCOS subjected to
LOD procedures and three to six cycles of ovulation induction with gonadotropins seem to be similar.9 A recent
study10 concluded that there also were no significant differences in the rates of ovulation and pregnancy between
women who received metformin (850 mg twice daily) for 3
months and women who had undergone LOD.
There is some evidence that LOD is associated with
decreased serum vascular endothelial growth factor, insulinlike growth factor, LH, and reduced ovarian Doppler blood
flow velocities.11 However, adhesion formation and destruction of some ovarian tissue by such techniques remain
a major concern. In a study12 that investigated the mediumand long-term (4–9 years) effects of LOD, the mean ovarian
volume was found to decrease significantly from 11 mL
before LOD to 8.5 mL at 1 to 3 years and remained low (8.4
mL) at long-term follow-up. One study13 evaluated the
changes in ovarian volume after laparoscopic treatment of
PCOS in CC-resistant anovulatory women. The researchers
reported a transient increase followed by a significant reduction in ovarian volume.13 Although such reduction in
ovarian volume could be a sign of normalization of ovarian
function in women with PCOS, it may also develop secondary to excessive ovarian tissue loss. It was found that a
single drilling with electrosurgery would destroy an overage
of 0.4 mL of stromal tissue.13 The relationship between
ovarian volume and ovarian reserve is well established.14,15
Therefore, a decrease in ovarian reserve might be a longTable 1 Comparisons of baseline characteristics
Characteristic (mean 
SD or frequency [%])
LOMNI group
n  17
OI  IUI group
n 18
Age (yrs) 26.3  4.3 25.6  4.08
Body mass index
(kg/m2)
27.4  4.2 26.3  3.2
Duration of infertility
(yrs)
5.7  2.02 5.6  1.9
Day 3 FSH (mIU/mL) 3.8  1.2 4.01  2.2
Day 3 LH (mIU/mL) 10.05  4.8 10.01  4.6
Day 3 estradiol (pg/mL) 65.1  23.1 56.3  25.5
Day 3 free testosterone
(pg/mL)
0.93  0.3 1.26  0.8
Day 3 total testosterone
(pg/mL)
2.9  0.7 2.9  0.9
Day 3 DHEA-sulfate
(ng/dL)
184.1  41.4 179.6  40.7
Day 3 prolactin (ng/mL) 17.9  5.5 17.5  4.5
Androstenedione
(ng/mL)
2.77  1.2 2.68  0.9
Insulin (U/mL) 23.2  3.2 24.4  3.6
17-hydroxy progesterone
(ng/mL)
2.4  1.3 2.8  0.58
Cycle irregularity 17 (100) 15 (83)
DHEA  dehydroepiandrosterone; FSH  follicle-stimulating hormone; IUI  intrauterine insemination; LH  luteinizing hormone;
LOMNI  laparoscopic ovarian multi-needle intervention; OI  ovulation induction.
For all comparisons, p .05.
Kaya et al Ovarian multi-needle intervention 357
term risk for ovarian destructive techniques such as electrocauterization and laser vaporization.
Adhesion formation is another concern in women subjected to LOD. Six (85%) of 7 patients treated with electrosurgery and 8 (80%) of 10 women submitted to laser
therapy of polycystic ovaries were shown to have adhesions
during second-look laparoscopic intervention.5 Hence, standard LOD is associated with a high rate of adhesion formation.
To overcome the limitations of standard LOD techniques
described above, low-wattage bipolar current for ovarian
drilling was used.16 It was suggested that bipolar forceps
with jaws of 1 mm would decrease the risk of over treatment
and consequent ovarian atrophy with unipolar electrocautery.16
Considering all these data, we developed a new device
with fine milimetric needles that would penetrate the ovarian stroma and accomplish similar function with conventional ovarian drilling procedures. A limitation of our instrument is the 2-mm needle length indicating superficial
penetration of the ovarian tissue. Abnormal follicles below
that level might not be drained. On the other hand, our
device and technique has some advantages. First, need for
electrosurgery or laser is eliminated, decreasing the cost and
possibly preventing adhesion formation. Although squeezing of ovarian tissue during our technique might destroy
some ovarian tissue, the extent of destruction might be
expected to be lower than the other techniques, which might
yield relatively uncontrolled energy forms.
Conclusion
Although we showed that LOMNI is an effective and inexpensive procedure probably avoiding unwanted effects such
as adhesion formation, further prospective studies concerning its use and efficacy are needed.
References
1. Speroff L, Glass RH, Kase NG. Induction of ovulation. In: Speroff L,
Glass RH, Kase NG (eds). Clinical Gynecologic Endocrinology and
Infertility. 5th ed. Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins;1994:897-930.
2. Homburg R. The management of infertility associated with polycystic
ovary syndrome. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2003;1:109.
3. Pirwany I, Tulandi T. Laparoscopic treatment of polycystic ovaries: is
it time to relinquish the procedure? Fertil Steril. 2003;80:241-251.
4. Steinkampf MP, Azziz R. Laparoscopic ovarian and paraovarian surgery. In: Azziz R, Murphy AA (eds). Practical Manual of Operative
Laparoscopy and Hysteroscopy. 2nded. New York: Springer-Verlag;
1996:147-162.
5. Gurgan T, Kisnisci H, Yaralı H, et al. Evaluation of adhesion formation after laparoscopic treatment of polycystic ovarian disease. Fertil
Steril. 1991;56:1176-1178.
6. Naether OGJ, Fischer R. Adhesion formation after laparoscopic electrocoagulation of the ovarian surface in polycystic ovary patients.
Fertil Steril. 1993;60:95-98.
7. Dabirashrafi H, Mohamad K, Behjatnia Y, Moghadami-Tabrize N.
Adhesion formation after ovarian electrocauterization on patients with
polycystic ovary syndrome. Fertil Steril. 1991;55:1200-1201.
8. Gurgan T, Yaralı H, Urman B. Laparoscopic treatment of polycystic
ovarian disease. Hum Reprod. 1994;9:573-577.
9. Farquhar C, Vandekerckhove P, Lilford R. Laparoscopic drilling by
diathermy or laser for ovulation induction in anovulatory polycystic
ovary syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2001; 4:CD001122.
10. Malkawi HY, Qublan HS, Hamaideh AH. Medical versus surgical
treatment for clomiphene citrate-resistant women with polycystic
ovary syndrome. J Obstet Gynaecol. 2003;23:289-293.
11. Amin AF, Abd el-Aal DE, Derwish AM, Meki AR. Evaluation of the
impact of laparoscopic ovarian drilling on Doppler indices of ovarian
stromal blood flow, serum vascular endothelial growth factor, and
insulin-like growth factor-1 in women with polycystic ovary syndrome. Fertil Steril. 2003;79:938-941.
12. Amer SA, Banu Z, Li TC, Cooke ID. Long-term follow-up of patients
with polycystic ovary syndrome after laparoscopic ovarian drilling:
endocrine and ultrasonographic outcomes. Hum Reprod. 2002;17:
2851-2857.
13. Tulandi T, Watkin K, Tan SL. Reproductive performance and threedimensional ultrasound volume determination of polycystic ovaries
following laparoscopic ovarian drilling. Int J Fertil Womens Med.
1997;42:436-440.
14. Lass A, Skull J, McVeigh E, et al. Measurement of ovarian volume by
transvaginal sonography before ovulation induction with human
menopausal gonadotropin for in-vitro fertilization can predict poor
ovarian response. Hum Reprod. 1997;12:294-297.
15. Ozkaya O, Kaya H, Sezik M, et al. The value of laboratory tests and
ultrasonography in evaluating ovarian response to ovulation induction
treatment with low-dose recombinant follicle-stimulating hormone. Int
J Fertil Womens Med. 2004;49:83-87.
16. Barisic D, Grizelj V, Corusic A. Pregnancy following the laparoscopic
bipolar electrocoagulation of polycystic ovaries resistant to medicamentous ovulation induction: a case report. Eur J Obstet Gynecol
Reprod Biol. 1999;83:225-226.
Table 2 Comparisons of outcome measures
Outcome
(frequency [%] or mean  SD) LOMNI group n  17 OI  IUI group n  18 Significance
Improvement in cycle regularity 12/16 (75) 2/16 (12.5) p .01
Clinical pregnancy rate 6/17 (35.3) 6/18 (33.3) NS
Multiple pregnancy rate NA 2/16 (12.5) NS
Mild to moderate OHSS NA 4/16 (25) p .05
Cost/treatment ($) 1081  234 2214  356 p .001
IUI  intrauterine insemination; LOMNI  laparoscopic ovarian multi-needle intervention; NA  not applicable; NS  not significant; OHSS 
ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome; OI  ovulation induction.
358 Journal of Minimally Invasive Gynecology, Vol 12, No 4, July/August 2005