Minilaparoscopic ovarian drilling under
local anesthesia in patients with polycystic
ovary syndrome
Fulvio Zullo, M.D.,a,b Massimiliano Pellicano, M.D.,b,c Errico Zupi, M.D.,d
Maurizio Guida, M.D.,c Pasquale Mastrantonio, M.D.,a and Carmine Nappi, M.D.a
University of Catanzaro, Catanzaro, Italy; University of Naples “Federico II,” Naples, and
Private Endoscopic Associates, Naples, Italy
Objective: To assess pain control in patients with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) who are undergoing
ovarian drilling during minilaparoscopy under local anesthesia and conscious sedation and to evaluate the
efficacy of this protocol compared with the traditional approach in terms of operative and discharge times,
subsequent ovulation, and pregnancy.
Design: Prospective randomized study.
Setting: University hospitals and private day-surgery unit.
Patient(s): Sixty-two infertile women with PCOS.
Intervention(s): Group A underwent minilaparoscopic ovarian drilling under local anesthesia and conscious
sedation. Group B (control group) was treated with traditional ovarian drilling by laparoscopy under general
anesthesia.
Main Outcome Measure(s): Intraoperative pain score in group A. Hormonal profile before and after surgery,
operative and discharge times, postoperative analgesic requirements, and reproductive follow-up in both groups.
Result(s): Group A showed a good intraoperative pain score. The hormonal profile after surgery did not differ
between groups A and B. Operative times were also similar for both groups. The number of patients
discharged within 2 hours after surgery was significantly higher in group A. The need for postoperative
analgesics was significantly higher in group B. No statistically significant differences were noted between the
groups in terms of pregnancy and ovulation rates.
Conclusion(s): Intraoperative and postoperative local anesthesia plus conscious sedation allows outpatient
bilateral ovarian drilling by minilaparoscopy to be performed without general anesthesia. The high pregnancy
rates, the simplicity of the method, and the faster discharge time offer a new option for patients with PCOS
who are resistant to clomiphene citrate. Moreover, ovarian cauterization can be performed simultaneously with
a diagnostic minilaparoscopy and integrated into the infertility workup of these patients. (Fertil Sterilt 2000;
74:376–9. ©2000 by American Society for Reproductive Medicine.)
Key Words: Polycystic ovary syndrome, infertility, minilaparoscopy, ovarian drilling, local anesthesia,
conscious sedation, lidocaine, bupivacaine
Anovulatory infertility has been commonly
associated with polycystic ovary syndrome
(PCOS). A variety of surgical options for the
treatment of PCOS have been applied during laparoscopy, such as biopsy, cauterization,
multielectrocoagulation, and laser surgery (1).
Laparoscopic ovarian diathermy represents
an effective treatment for clomiphene citrate
(CC)-resistant patients and possesses numerous
advantages over gonadotropin therapy, including no increased risk of ovarian hyperstimulation or multiple pregnancy and a lower incidence of spontaneous abortion (1).
With the development of new, small-diameter laparoscopes that provide an optical view
comparable to conventional instruments, minilaparoscopy can now be used routinely for diagnostic laparoscopy (2). In association with
preoperative and postoperative local anesthesia
(3) and new protocols for conscious sedation
(4), this new approach can be used for outpatient operative minilaparoscopy without general anesthesia. Postoperative pain control is
crucial for patients undergoing outpatient minilaparoscopy because the average time for discharge is 2–3 hours after surgery (3).
Received October 5, 1999;
revised and accepted
February 1, 2000.
Supported by Fondazione
Nuori Orizzonti. Surgical
equipment for this
investigation was provided
by Wolf GmbH, Knittlingen,
Germany.
Reprint requests:
Massimiliano Pellicano,
M.D., Dipartimento di
Ginecologia, Ostetricia e
Fisiopatologia della
Riproduzione Umana,
Universita` di Napoli
“Federico II,” Via Pansini,
5, 80131 Napoli, Italy
(FAX: 39-081-7462905;
E-mail: pellican@unina.it).
a Department of
Gynecologic and Pediatric
Sciences, Reggio Calabria
University, Catanzaro, Italy.
b Endogyn Service, Private
Endoscopic Associates.
c Department of Obstetrics,
Gynecology, and
Reproductive Medicine,
University of Naples
“Federico II.”
d Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, University
of Rome “Tor Vergata,”
and Endogyn Service,
Private Endoscopic
Associates.
FERTILITY AND STERILITYt
VOL. 74, NO. 2, AUGUST 2000
Copyright ©2000 American Society for Reproductive Medicine
Published by Elsevier Science Inc.
Printed on acid-free paper in U.S.A.
0015-0282/00/$20.00
PII S0015-0282(00)00611-7
376
We performed a prospective randomized study of 62
consenting patients to evaluate the following: [1] the feasibility of ovarian drilling during minilaparoscopy under local
anesthesia plus conscious sedation in terms of intraoperative
pain control and postoperative analgesic requirements and
[2] the efficacy of this technique compared with the conventional laparoscopic approach in terms of operative and discharge times and subsequent ovulation rates and pregnancy
rates (PRs).
MATERIALS AND METHODS
All patients included in the study were diagnosed with
PCOS and infertility, with a duration of .2 years. Women
formally consenting to undergo ovarian drilling were randomly allocated into two groups. In group A (n 5 32),
ovarian drilling was performed by minilaparoscopy under
local anesthesia plus conscious sedation. Group B (n 5 30),
the control group, underwent ovarian drilling by the traditional laparoscopic approach under general anesthesia. All
patients with bilateral tubal occlusion at the time of chromopertubation or with intrauterine pathology during intraoperative diagnostic hysteroscopy were excluded from the
study. We did not seek Institutional Review Board approval
for this study because we routinely administer local anesthesia at our institutions after both diagnostic and operative
minilaparoscopy.
To exclude the presence of metabolic or cardiorespiratory
disorders before surgery, a thorough clinical history was
obtained for each patient and a physical examination was
performed.
PCOS was diagnosed as described previously (5). All
patients who failed to respond to CC at a maximum dose of
150 mg/d for 5 days for at least three cycles and whose
partners had normal seminal parameters were included in the
study. Serum concentrations of LH, FSH, T, and androstenedione (A) were measured on cycle days 3–5 and 4 days
after surgery with the use of commercial kits. Ovulation was
confirmed with assays for serum P level and ultrasonography. The reproductive follow-up lasted $1 year. If ovulation
did not occur within 3 months after surgery, the women were
treated with CC.
In group A, a 3.5-mm lenses-optic endoscope (Wolf,
Knittlingen, Germany) with a 0-degree view was used. The
operation was performed in an outpatient clinic room or in
a day-surgery setting. An emergency crash cart with a
defibrillator and a complete anesthesiology set with continuous electrocardiogram monitoring was available during the
procedure.
Immediately before surgery, 0.5 mg of atropine and 0.25
mg of fentanyl were administered, followed by a slow IV
injection of 2.5 mg of midazolam (Ipnovel; Roche, Milan,
Italy). Before insertion of the uterine manipulator, a paracervical block was obtained with 20 mL of 2% mepivacaine
injected through a 21-gauge needle at the 4- and 8-o’clock
positions. A diagnostic hysteroscopy was performed by
means of a 5.5-mm compact hysteroscope with saline as the
distention medium.
After cleansing of the abdomen, 10 mL of 1% mepivacaine was injected slowly beneath the umbilicus, gradually
deeper down to the peritoneum. After the subumbilical skin
incision, a minitrocar was pushed directly into the peritoneum. The 3.5-mm miniendoscope was then inserted, insufflating approximately 2 L of CO2. Two lateral ancillary sites
were anesthetized using 10 mL of 1% mepivacaine gradually
deeper down to the peritoneum. The patient was put briefly
in a steep Trendelenburg position to bring back the bowel
and then was reduced.
Subsequently, the peritoneal cavity was inspected carefully and a micrograsper was used to expose the fimbrial end
of the fallopian tube at the time of chromopertubation. Chromopertubation was performed by injecting 15 mL of methylene blue with 15 mL of 1% mepivacaine through the
uterine manipulator tubing. The mesoovary was infiltrated
bilaterally with 5 mL of 1% mepivacaine at two sites, close
to the infundibulopelvic end and the uteroovarian pedicle.
Ten to 15 cautery points were created in each ovary by
means of a unipolar needle.
At the end of the procedure, a 16-gauge, 36-cm needle
was inserted through an ancillary port, and 40 mL of 0.5%
lidocaine was sprayed over the diaphragmatic vault. After
the removal of all trocars, the SC tissue of the insertion sites
was injected with 5 mL of bupivacaine (Marcaina; Astra
Farmaceutici, Milan, Italy).
Pain control during the procedure was scored on a scale of
1 to 4, indicating excellent, good, sufficient, and poor pain
control, respectively. Postoperative analgesics were given
when requested by the patient. The analgesics consisted of
100 mg of IM ketoprofen or 30 mg of IM ketorolac. No oral
postoperative medications were administered, even after
hospital discharge. Patients were monitored in a recovery
room for $2 hours. Patients were discharged only when free
of discomfort.
In group B, laparoscopic ovarian cautery was performed
using a traditional 10-mm endoscope and general anesthesia.
The operation was performed through three ports: A 10-mm
laparoscope was inserted through the primary subumbilical
trocar, with two additional 5-mm trocars in the lower abdomen. A grasping forceps was used for manipulation of the
ovary. The unipolar needle was introduced through the other
secondary site of entry. Group B patients underwent the
same procedures as performed in group A, such as hysteroscopy and chromopertubation, except that they received no
local anesthesia.
The operative time and the number of patients discharged
at 2 hours were recorded.
Thirty women per group gave .80% power. Differences
FERTILITY & STERILITYt 377
in age, duration of infertility, and body mass index between
the groups were compared with the use of the two-tailed
Student’s t-test for unpaired data. Preoperative basal hormone values were compared with the postoperative values in
each group with a Student’s t-test for paired data. Ovulation
rates, PRs, and miscarriage rates, and the number of patients
discharged 2 hours after surgery were evaluated by the x2
test. Operative and discharge times were compared with use
of the Wilcoxon rank-sum test. P,.05 was defined as statistically significant.
RESULTS
Seventy-seven patients were initially enrolled in the
study. Seven patients did not consent to be included. After
randomization, eight women dropped out of the study (3 in
group A and 5 in group B) because of uterine pathology,
tubal occlusion, or extensive adhesions. Thus, 62 women
were considered as study patients. Group A (32 patients)
underwent minilaparoscopic ovarian drilling under local anesthesia, and group B (30 patients) underwent traditional
ovarian drilling under general anesthesia. Clinical and demographic data of the patients are reported in Table 1.
The pain score recorded for group A was 2.8 6 0.7 (Table
2). The operative time required for diagnostic evaluation and
ovarian drilling was not significantly different between the
groups. The mean discharge time and the need for additional
analgesics were significantly lower in group A than in the
control group (Table 2). The proportion of patients discharged 2 hours after surgery was significantly higher in
group A (71.8%) than in group B (0%) (Table 2).
PRs within 1 year of follow-up were higher in group A
(65.6%) than in group B (60%). The ovulation rate was
81.2% in group A and 86.6% in the control group. The
incidence of miscarriage was similar in both groups.
Endocrine data are reported in Table 3. LH values decreased significantly after surgery in both groups. Similarly,
A and T serum levels showed a statistically significant reduction after surgery in both groups. In contrast, FSH levels
did not change significantly after either minilaparoscopy or
laparoscopy.
No complications from local anesthetics were observed
during the study.
DISCUSSION
The laparoscopic approach to PCOS has been described
extensively (1). Local anesthesia has been used for many
gynecologic procedures and has been reported to reduce
postoperative pain after day-surgery diagnostic laparoscopy.
Our previous studies documented the implementation of
minilaparoscopy without general anesthesia in terms of both
diagnostic efficacy (6) and pain control during and after the
procedure (3). The recent development of small-diameter
TABLE 1
Clinical and demographic data in 62 patients undergoing
minilaparoscopy under local anesthesia (group A) or
laparoscopy with general anesthesia (group B).
Variable Group A Group B
No. of patients 32 30
Age (y) 31.3 6 2.9 30.1 6 3.5
Duration of infertility (y) 4.2 6 1.6 3.9 6 1.7
Body mass index (kg/m2
) 22.3 6 2.8 23.1 6 2.6
Note: Values are means 6 SD.
Zullo. Minilaparoscopic ovarian drilling. Fertil Steril 2000.
TABLE 2
Operative and reproductive data in patients treated by
minilaparoscopy under local anesthesia (group A) and
by laparoscopy with general anesthesia (group B).
Variable
Group A
(n 5 32)
Group B
(n 5 30)
Intraoperative pain score 2.8 6 0.7 —
Operative time (min) 31.3 6 9.1 28.4 6 7.3
Discharge time (h) 2.4 6 0.7a 6.2 6 2.3a
No. of patients discharged
2 hours after surgery (%) 23 (71.8)a 0a
No. of patients who required
additional analgesics (%) 7 (21.8)a 16 (53.3)a
Ovulation rate, % (n) 81.2 (26) 86.6 (29)
PR, % (n) 65.6 (21) 60.0 (18)
Miscarriage rate, % (n) 6.2 (2) 3.3 (1)
Note: Values are means 6 SD, n (%), or % (n). a P,.01 (group A versus group B).
Zullo. Minilaparoscopic ovarian drilling. Fertil Steril 2000.
TABLE 3
Hormonal profile before and after ovarian drilling in patients
treated by minilaparoscopy under local anesthesia (group
A) and by laparoscopy with general anesthesia (group B).
Hormone
Group A (n 5 32) Group B (n 5 30)
Before
surgery
After
surgery
Before
surgery
After
surgery
LH (IU/L) 17.4 6 3.6 14.4 6 2.9a 18.3 6 3.9 14.7 6 3.1a
FSH (IU/L) 7.1 6 0.7 7.7 6 1.2 6.8 6 0.9 7.2 6 1.1
A (nmol/L) 8.1 6 0.9 6.2 6 0.6a 8.9 6 1.2 6.9 6 1.2a
T (nmol/L) 3.1 6 1.0 2.3 6 0.7a 3.3 6 0.8 2.3 6 1.0a
Note: Values are means 6 SD. There were no statistically significant
differences in mean basal values between the groups.
a P,.01 compared with values before resection.
Zullo. Minilaparoscopic ovarian drilling. Fertil Steril 2000.
378 Zullo et al. Techniques and Instrumentation Vol. 74, No. 2, August 2000
minilaparoscopy allows an optical resolution comparable to
that obtained with traditional laparoscopes (2). In addition,
improvements in sedation and local-anesthesia protocols
(3, 4), may allow minilaparoscopy to become a routine outpatient procedure.
The aim of the present study was to evaluate the feasibility and efficacy of minilaparoscopic ovarian drilling under
local anesthesia and conscious sedation in terms of ovulation
rates and PRs after the procedure as compared with the
traditional laparoscopic approach.
This technique represents a new option for gynecologists,
which allows a significant reduction of androgen levels comparable to those observed after laparoscopic ovarian resection or laparoscopic electrocauterization, with the additional
benefit of being a less invasive technique that can be performed as an outpatient procedure without the need for
general anesthesia. Moreover, the high PRs and ovulation
rates in the follow-up period should encourage this approach
especially in patients with PCOS who require a diagnostic
evaluation for tubal patency. The low degree of invasiveness
and the modified conscious-sedation protocol of this new
approach, with the use of increasing but low doses of midazolam, allow an outpatient procedure with a quick patient
discharge (4).
This simple procedure appears to be particularly useful
for outpatient minilaparoscopies, in which the average discharge time is 2–3 hours after the operation. The effect of
local anesthesia is temporary; however, this approach allows the possibility of a quicker discharge, at 2 hours after
surgery (3).
The good intraoperative pain control reported in this
study demonstrates the feasibility of operative minilaparoscopy. Even though only a small volume of CO2 is used
during the technique and the surgeon performs maneuvers to
remove air from the abdomen at the end of the procedure,
residual gas can accumulate under the diaphragm and cause
peritoneal irritation, especially when an upright position is
maintained at the time of hospital discharge. For this reason,
it is useful to spray lidocaine at the end of the procedure.
Moreover, reduced exposure to CO2 during minilaparoscopy
may decrease the rate of adhesion formation as compared
with conventional laparoscopy.
In conclusion, technical improvements such as smaller
optic systems, ancillary instruments, and improved anesthetic procedures allow minilaparoscopy to be performed
under local anesthesia and conscious sedation. This procedure may become a standard approach for the evaluation of
infertile patients with PCOS, in whom ovarian drilling can
be integrated into the diagnostic workup.
Acknowledgment: The authors thank Agnese Fiorentino, B.Sc., for editorial
assistance.
References
1. Cohen J. Laparoscopic procedures for treatment of infertility related to
polycystic ovarian syndrome. Hum Reprod Update 1996;2:337–44.
2. Kovacs GT, Baker G, Dillon M, Peters M. The microlaparoscope should
be used routinely for diagnostic laparoscopy. Fertil Steril 1998;70:698–
701.
3. Pellicano M, Zullo F, Di Carlo C, Zupi E, Nappi C. Postoperative pain
control after microlaparoscopy in patients with infertility: a prospective
randomized study. Fertil Steril 1998;70:289–92.
4. Almeida OD, Val-Gallas JM, Browning JL. A protocol for conscious
sedation in microlaparoscopy. J Am Assoc Gynecol Laparosc 1997;4:
591–4.
5. Insler V, Lunenfeld B. Polycystic ovarian disease: a challenge and
controversy. Gynecol Endocrinol 1990;5:51–69.
6. Zupi E, Sbracia M, Marconi D, Zullo F, Santi K, Solima E, et al. Pain
mapping during minilaparoscopy in infertile patients without pathology.
J Am Assoc Gynecol Laparosc 1999;6:51–4.
FERTILITY & STERILITYt 379