A comparative clinical trial of the tubal ring versus the
Rocket clip for female sterilization
Cecilio Aranda, M.D.,t Delfina de Badia, M.D., Maher Mahran, M.D., and
Paul J. Feldblum, M.S.P.H.
San Jose, Costa Rica, San Salvador, El Salvador, Cairo, Egypt, and Research Triangle Park,
North Carolina
Studies of application of the Rocket clip compared with the tubal ring were conducted at three sites.
Procedures were randomly assigned to the patients; 332 women were sterilized with the tubal ring and
331 were sterilized with the Rocket clip. The occlusion devices were applied via a minilaparotomy incision.
Surgical difficulties and injuries and technical failures occurred with comparable frequency in the two
groups. There were two method failures in each tubal occlusion group; the 24-month life-table preghancy
rate was 1.0 per 100 women in the tubal ring group and 0.9 per 100 in the Rocket clip group. The Rocket
spring-loaded clip appears to be as safe, effective, and easy to apply as the tubal ring for tubal occlusion.
(AM J 0BSTET GYNECOL 1985;153:755-9.)
Key words: Tubal ring, spring-loaded clip, female sterilization, clinical trial
Various mechanical devices for tubal occlusion have
been developed in an effort to avoid the complications
associated with other methods such as ligation and electrocoagulation. The popularity of these devices has increased through the last decade. One well-known and
prevalent mechanical occlusion method is the tubal
ring, developed by Yoon et al.' in the early 1970s. Another popular technique is the use of the hinged springloaded clip, based on the early work of Hulka and
Omran.2
In the mid- l 970s, Family Health International (formerly the International Fertility Research Program)
sponsored randomized comparative clinical trials of the
prototype Hulka-Clemens spring-loaded clip versus the
tubal ring applied via laparoscopy. In one study of postabortion and postpartum women, surgical difficulties
and method failures were far more common among
those sterilized by the clips than by the tubal rings."
Manufacturing errors in the production of the prototype equipment were largely responsible for the excess
of failures attributed to the clips'; the investigators also
hypothesized that the clips might be too small to ocFrom the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hospital Mexico,
Caja Costarricense del Seguro Social, the Hospital de Maternidad,
the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ain Sha"tl Universitv, and the Clinical Trials Division, Family Health International.
Part~al support for this research wa1 provided by Family Health International with funds from the United States Agency for International Development.
Received for publicationjul_v 22, 1985; revised August 29, 1985;
accepted September 3, 1985.
Reprint requests: Paul Feldblum, M.S.P.H., Family Health International, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709.
fWe regret to announce the death of Dr. Cecilio Aranda prior to
publication of this article.
elude fully the enlarged fallopian tubes of recently
pregnant women." Another clip versus ring study reported comparable rates of surgical difficulties and
method failures,' although not all cases were included
in the life-table pregnancy rates.
In 1976, Lieberman" and Rocket of London Ltd. produced a spring-loaded clip and applicator for doublepuncture laparoscopic sterilization. The Rocket clip is
basically a Hulka-Clemens clip with an increased jaw
pressure of 90 gm; also it lacks the silicone rubber filler
at its proximal end. Early evaluations of the safety of
Rocket clip occlusion in the United Kingdom demonstrated that 97.7% of the procedures were uncomplicated. Surgical injuries occurred in 1.6% of the cases/
and tubal ligation was required in 0.7% of the procedures. No method failures were reported during 6-
month follow-up.
Family Health International then undertook to evaluate the performance of the modified spring-loaded
clip compared with the tubal ring, the standard for
mechanical tubal occlusion devices. This randomized
trial was conducted at centers in San Jose, Costa Rica,
San Salvador, El Salvador, and Cairo, Egypt, to determine the safety, effectiveness, and ease of minilaparotomy application of the two devices.
Material and methods
Between November, 1978, and January, 1982, 663
minilaparotomy sterilizations were scheduled at the
three centers-332 planned tubal ring occlusions and
331 planned Rocket clip occlusions. Random allocation
labels generated by computer, printed at Family Health
International, and sealed in opaque envelopes were
opened by the operator at the time of the procedure
755 
756 Aranda et al.
Table I. Method-related surgical events
Event
Surgical difficulties
With equipment
In occluding tubes
Tcital
Surgical injuries
Tubal/mesosalpinx injury without bleeding
Tubal/mesosalpinx injury with bleeding
Total
Technical.failures
Due to equipment
Due to adhesions
Due w thickened tubes
Due to tubal injury
Total
to determine which occlusive technique would be performed in each case. One operator performed the surgical procedure; another physician, who was unaware
of the occlusive technique used, provided postoperative
care. Only women who requested sterilization to limit
family size and were free of major systemic and pelvic
abnormalities were eligible for the study.
Information on patient characteristics, medical history and examination, and the clinical aspects of the
procedures was recorded on standard forms by the
hospital staff at the time of sterilization. All women
were asked to return for an early follow-up visit within
30 days of the operation and again al 6, I 2, and 24
months after sterilization. Slightly more than half of
the women in both groups returned for the early follow-up visits. The 6-, 12-, and 24-monlh follow-up rates
in the tubal ring group were 84.97c, 61.4%, and 4 7.0%.
The corresponding rates in the Rocket clip group were
83.4%, 61.3%, and 46.5%. Thirty cases of technical
failure (procedures that could not be completed as
planned) have been excluded from the follow-up
results.
Results
Patients and procedures. The mean ages of the
women were 31.5 years in the tubal ring group and
31.9 years in the Rocket clip group. The mean parities
were 4. 7 and 4.6 in the ring and clip groups, respectively. Contraceptive use in the 3 months prior to sterilization or conception was also similar for both groups.
More than 45% of the women in both groups had not
been using contraception immediately prior to admission or pregnancy. The most popular method of contraception in both groups was oral contraceptives.
Previous intra peritoneal operations were reported by
26 women (7.8%) in the ring group and 15 women
(4.5%) in the clip group. The preoperative pelvic exRing (N = 332)
n I %
4 1.2
14 4.2
18 5.4
6 1.8
4 1.2
IO 3.0
4 1.2
6 1.8
5 1.5
2 0.6
17 5.1
n
7
7
14
4
()
4
3
0
()
()
3
December l, 1985
Am J Obstet Gynecol
Clip (N = 331)
I %
2.1
2.1
4.2
1.2
1.2
0.9
0.9
amination revealed that four women in the ring group
(1.2%) had a retroverted uterus, compared with I I
women (3.3%) in the clip group, and four women in
the ring group ( 1.2%) had a fixed uterus, compared
with five women in the clip group (1.5%). In addition,
six women in the ring group (l.8%) had tender or
enlarged adnexa, compared with four women in the
clip group ( 1.2% ).
The two technique groups had the same percentages
of interval and post-spontaneous abortion procedures
(about 55% and 45%, respectively). In the postabonion
category, curettage procedures were performed prior
to sterilization after spontaneous abortions. These
minilaparotomy sterilizations were performed with
general anesthesia in 55% of cases and with analgesic
and/or tranquilizer plus local anesthesia in 45% of the
procedures.
Surgical events. Surgical difficulties and injuries occurred with comparable frequency in the ring and clip
groups (i'able I). This was true both among interval
women and among postabortion wotnen. The percentages of method-related difficulties were 5.4 and 4.2
in the ring and clip groups, respectively, and consisted mainly of difficulties in tubal occlusion. Ten
tubal injuries occurred in the tubal ring group (3.0%),
compared with four tubal injuries in the Rocket clip
group (1.2%).
The rates of surgical difficulties not related to the
technique of tubal occlusion were I I. I% in the ring
group and 8.5% in the clip group. The most common
of these was difficulty in visualizing the tubes (8.7% and
6.0% in the ring and clip groups, respectively). Several
surgical injuries not related to the technique of occlusion occurred, including four uterine perforations, one
bladder injury, one bowel injury, and one uterine laceration.
Technical failures are sterilization procedures that 
Volume 153
Number 7
Table II. Long-term follow-up events*
Event
Pregnancy
Method failure
Luteal phase
Abdominal/pelvic surgical procedure
Hysterectomy
Cervical conization
Vaginal fistula
Vaginal prolapse
Herniorrhaphy
Gallstones removed
Total
*Excludes 30 technical failures.
n
2
1
2
2
0
0
I
I
6
Tubal ring versus Rocket clip 757
Ringt (N = 268) Clipt (N = 277)
I % n I o/c
0.7 2 0.7
0.4 I 0.4
0.7 I 0.4
0.7 0
I 0.4
I 0.4
0.4 0
0.4 0
2.2 3 1.2
tSample sizes are those women with at least one long-term follow-up visit.
cannot be completed as planned. There were 25 technical failures in the tubal ring group (7.5%) and five
technical failures in the Rocket clip group ( 1.5%)
(p < 0.01 ). The causes of the 25 technical failures in
the ring group were: adhesions, six; thick tubes, five;
obesity, five; difficulties with the ring applicator, four;
surgical injury, three (two cases of tubal injury and one
case of uterine perforation); ovarian cyst, one; and random allocation error, one. In about one third of these
cases, the operator resorted to salpingectomy, fimbriectomy, or Pomeroy ligation and excision to complete the
sterilization.
In the clip group, the five technical failures were due
to difficulty with the clip equipment, three; pelvic inflammatory disease, one; and surgical injury, one (uterine perforation). Three of these women were sterilized
by salpingectomy, one woman underwent a Pomeroy
procedure, and in one case the minilaparotomy incision
was extended to allow repair of a uterine perforation.
Postoperative and early follow-up events. About
90% of the women in both groups remained hospitalized for at least one night. The mean numbers of nights
of hospitalization were 1.4 and 1.2 in the ring and clip
groups, respectively. During the period between sterilization and discharge from the hospital, there were
14 (4.6%) cases of vaginal bleeding other than menses
or lochia in the ring group and eight cases (2.5%) in
the clip group. A total of 145 women in each group
(47.2% and 44.5% in the ring and clip groups, respectively) complained of pelvic pain during recovery.
Among women returning for an early follow-up visit,
there were six women (3.5%) in the ring group and
two (1.1 %) in the clip group with a urinary tract infection. Three women in the ring group (3.6%) had evidence of pelvic infection at this time, one of whom was
readmitted with an adnexal infection and remained in
the hospital for two nights for antibiotic therapy.
Long-term follow-up events. There were a total of
six pregnancies reported at follow-up, three in each
group (Table II). In each group, two of the pregnancies
were method failures and one pregnancy appeared to
be a luteal phase pregnancy (patient was pregnant at
the time of sterilization). In the ring group, an ectopic
pregnancx w4s conceived.approximately 22 months af-
.ter the sterili~ation. The pregnancy was terminated at
an estimated gestational age of 8 weeks, at which time
it appeared that the ring was absent from the left tube
where the implantation occurred. The woman was resterilized by the Pomeroy method. Another ring failure
resulted in a term live birth; the estimated date of conception was within the first month after sterilization.
Both of the method failures in the clip group were
confirmed uterine pregnancies for which conception
occurred approximately 5 months after the operation.
Both of the women were delivered of a normal baby
and were resterilized by the Pomeroy method; for one
woman the clips appeared misapplied (no further information was available), but in the other woman the
clips seemed to be properly placed on both tubes. The
gross cumulative 24-month life-table pregnancy rate
was 1.0 per 100 women in the ring group and 0.9 per
100 in the clip group (p > 0.10).
There were nine abdominal or pelvic surgical procedures reported during long-term follow-up (31 +
days after sterilization; Table II). In the ring group,
two women underwent hysterectomy for carcinoma in
situ, two women had cervical conization because of severe dysplasia, one woman underwent a herniorrhaphy, and one woman had gallstones removed. In the
clip group, there was one hysterectomy for cervical carcinoma in situ, one repair of a vaginal fistula, and one
operation to repair vaginal prolapse.
Besides the pelvic surgical procedures, two women
in the ring group were readmitted to the hospital dur-
758 Aranda et al.
ing long-term follow-up, one for treatment of pelvic
inflammatory disease (I I months after sterilization)
and the other to receive medical treatment for an abscess around the surgical incision (>I month after sterilization).
Comment
Outside of major urban medical centers, minilaparotomy is the surgical approach of choice in the developing world.' The method is simple to learn and
requires no special surgical skill or complicated equipment. As with Iaparoscopy, the minilaparotomy incision
is compatible with various techniques of tubal occlusion.
The technique of Pomeroy ligation and excision is most
commonly used, but minilaparotomy applicators for
mechanical occlusion devices have been developed as
well. This study compared two such systems of tubal
occlusion-the tubal ring and the Rocket springloaded clip.
Problems with the ring and the clip applicator equipment were responsible for several technical failures and
lesser difficulties. Equipment problems were directly
responsible for four of the 25 technical failures in the
ring group, and an additional 13 ring technical failures
were method-related. Equipment problems caused
three of five clip technical failures. Also, neither device
may be well suited to occlusion of thick or edematous
tubes, the underlying cause of seven technical failures
at the El Salvadorean center.
Furthermore, operators noted that the Rocket clips
occasionally fell off the applicator, and the applicator
at the Costa Rican center often did not close the clips
tightly enough, necessitating further closure with forceps. The original clip applicator in the El Salvadorean
center required replacement. Despite these problems
and the fact that the operators were more experienced
with tubal ring equipment, the Rocket clip system had
rates of adverse surgical events similar to those of the
tubal ring system.
Surgical difficulties ( I6.6% overall) and injuries
(4.2% overall) occurred more frequently in the ring
group in this clinical trial than in pooled Family Health
International data from an earlier period,'' indicating
a center-specific effect. In the previous pooled data,
surgical difficulties and injuries were reported in I. 7%
and 1.5% of the minilaparotomy tubal ring cases. Not
surprisingly, in both the earlier study and this report
tubal injuries predominated. Yoon and Poliakoff1" reported that tubal transections occurred in 3.3% of their
cases, approximately the same as the ring tubal injury
rate in this study (3.0%).
Despite the relatively small number of cases, the
pregnancy rate in the tubal ring group in this trial, 1.0
per 100 women at 24 months, is comparable to rates
reported by other authors. In one Family Health InDecember l, l 985
Am J Obstet Gynecol
ternational ring study the I 2-month life-table rates
were 2.7 per 100 postabortion women and 1.3 per IOO
postpartum women." In another ring versus clip comparative study the 24-month life-table pregnancy rate
for the tubal ring group was 0.8 per 100 interval
women.5 One report on more than I 0,000 pooled cases
found a minilaparotomy tubal ring life-table pregnancy
rate of 0.4 per 100 interval women at 12 months and
0.6 per 100 postpartum women at 12 months."
In the past, analyses of the prototype spring-loaded
clip have reported method failure rates higher than
those of other tubal occlusion methods. In a large comparative ring-clip study, the 12-month life-table clip
pregnancy rate was 9.4 per I 00 postabortion women
and I I.I per IOO postpartum women.' The crude failure rate among the first group of women sterilized with
the prototype clip was 25 per I 000 at I-year followup." Subsequent to these early studies, however, much
lower pregnancy rates have been noted. Among the
first 533 women sterilized with the Rocket clip in London, no pregnancies occurred within 6 months.' Another report found the I 2-month life-table pregnancy
rate to be 0.2 per IOO interval women sterilized laparoscopically with the Rocket clip. 1
" The 24-month Iifetable pregnancy rate for women sterilized with the
Rocket clip in this trial was 0.9 per I 00, slightly lower
than but not significantly different from the rate in the
tubal ring group. Design improvements and tighter
quality control' have resulted in a spring-loaded clip as
effective as other occlusive techniques.
The popularity of spring-loaded clip tubal occlusion
is growing slowly in the United States. The 1982 American Association of Gynecologic Laparoscopists membership survey revealed that 4% of laparoscopic sterilizations in that year were clip procedures, up from
I% in I 976. 11 One reason for this increase may be the
presumed reversibility of clip sterilizations, which may
well be greater than that of other techniques because
of the small length of fallopian tube necrosis. 11 In this
trial conducted in three developing world sites, the
Rocket clip proved to be as safe, effective, and easy to
apply as the tubal ring for minilaparotomy female sterilization.
We thank Drs. Gary Grubb, Peter Lamptey, and Albert Siemens and Ms. Lynda Cole for their insightful
reviews.
REFERENCES
I. Yoon IB, Wheeless CR, King TM. A preliminary report
of a new laparoscopic sterilization approach: the silicone
rubber band technique. AM J OilSTET GY'.'ECOI. I 974;
120:132-6.
2. Hulka JF, Om ran KF. Comparative tubal occlusion: rigid
and spring-loaded clips. Fertil Steril l 972;23:633-9.
3. Lean TH, Vengadasalam D, Cole LI'. A comparison of
the clip and ring techniques for laparoscopic sterilization
of postabortion and postpartum patients. Int J Gynaecol
Obstet 1978;16:150-6. 
Volume 153
!'\umber 7
4. Hulka JF, Omran K, Lieberman BA, et al. Laparoscopic
sterilization with the spring clip: instrumentation development and current clinical experience. A~t J OssTn
GY:\ECOL 1979;135:1016-20.
5. Argueta G, Henriquez E, Amador MN, et al. Comparison
of laparoscopic sterilization via spring-loaded clip and
ttibal ring. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 1980; 18: 115-8.
6. Lieberman BA. A clip applicator for laparoscopic sterilization. Fertil Steril 1976;27: I 036-9.
7. Lieberman BA, Gordon AG, Bostock JF, et al. Laparoscopic sterilization with spring-loaded clips: double-puncture technique. J Rep rod \led 1977; 18:241-5.
8. World Health Organization Task Force on Female Sterilization. Minilaparotomy or laparoscopy for sterilization:
a multicenter, multinational randomized study. A~t J O!lSTF.T GY:\ECOL 1982; 143:645-52.
9. Mumford SD, Bhiwandiwala PP. Tubal ring sterilization:
Tubal ring versus Rocket clip
experience with 10,086 cases. Obstet Gynecol 1981;
57:150-7.
JO. Yoon IB, PoliakoffSR. Laparoscopic tubal ligation: a follow-up report on the Yoon Falope ring methodology. J
Reprod Med 1979;23:76-80.
11. Hulka JF, Mercer JP, Fishburne JI, et al. Spring-clip sterilization: one-year follow-up of 1,079 cases. AM J 0BSTJ.:T
GnEcoL 1976;125:10'.19-43.
12. Bhiwandiwala PP, Mumford SD, Feldblum PJ. A comparison of different laparoscopic sterilization occlusion
techniques in 24,4'.19 procedures. A~t J OBSTET GY:\ECOL
1982;144:319-31.
13. Phillips JM, Hulka JF, Peterson HB. American Association of Gynecologic Laparoscopists' 1982 membership
survey. J Reprod Med l 984;29:592-4.
14. Hulka JF, Noble AD, Letchworth AT, et al. Reversibility
of clip sterilizations. Lancet 1982;2:927.
Indications for and timing of delivery in diabetic pregnancies
Ibrahim S. Mashini, M.D., Hossam E. Fadel, M.D., George H. Nelson, M.D., Ph.D., and
Hamid A. Hadi, M.D.
Augusta, Georgia
The management of 430 diabetic pregnancies is presented. Our protocol emphasized "tight" metabolic
control and assessment of fetal well-being by antepartum fetal heart rate testings and estriol levels.
Spontaneous labor was allowed in uncomplicated Class A diabetic patients. Labor in complicated cases
and insulin-dependent diabetic pregnancies was induced after establishing fetal lung maturity, except when
a maternal or fetal complication dictated otherwise. A significant drop in estriol was observed in 4% of
Class A diabetic patients and 10.2% of insulin-dependent diabetic patients. None developed a positive
contraction stress test. Abnormal fetal well-being tests contributed minimally to the indications for induction
of labor. The incidence of induced preterm delivery was 2.8% iri Cfass A diabetic patients and 18.4% in
insulin-dependent diabetic ones. The perinatal mortality was 5.6: 1000 and 13: 1000, respectively. The
incidence of respiratory distress syndrome was very low, and none of the cases were associated with a
"mature" amniotic fluid lecithin phosphorus measurement. (AM J OssTET GvNECOL 1985;153:759-66.)
Key words: Diabetic pregnancy, induction of labor, amniocentesis, antepartum fetal heart
rate testing, estriol
The perinatal outcome of diabetic pregnancies has
markedly improved in the last decade. The protocol
that has been developed by one of us (H. E. F.) and the
results of management of patients at the Medical College of Georgia during the years 1976 to 1978 have
been published.' Since that time, routine prenatal
screening for carbohydrate intolerance was instituted
and more efforts were directed to the achievement of
"tight" metabolic control. Although most published reFrom the Department of Obstetrio and Gynecology. Section of ,Waternal-Fetal Medicine, Medical Colfrge of Gl'lngia Hmpital and
Clinics.
Received for fmblicationju11e 17, 1985; revill'd Augmt 27, 1985;
accepted Septembn 3, 1985.
Reprint requests: Hossnm E. Fadel, M.D., Department 1f Obstl'lrirs
and Gynecology. Section of Maternal-Feta/ !•vfedfrine, Medirnl College 1f Georgia Hospital and Clinics, A Ul{Wla, GA 30912.
ports emphasize the metabolic control and fetal monitoring aspects,,_, proper timing of delivery has not been
stressed. Our protocol calls for delivery timing to be
based on the results of fetal well-being and fetal lung
maturity studies.
In this report we describe our experience during the
years 1979 to 1982 in the management of diabetic pregnancies, with an emphasis on the criteria used for timing of delivery.
Material and methods
Beginning in April, 1978, all prenatal patients (excluding known diabetic patients) underwent glucose
screening (50 gm load) at about 20 weeks according to
a previouslv published protocol.'' Class A diabetic patients were diagnosed on the basis of an abnormal glucose tolerance test, that is, two or more blood glucose
759 