Int J Gynaecol Obstet 15: 455-458, 1978
Laparoscopic Electrocoagulation and Tubal
Ring Techniques for Sterilization:
A Comparative Study
Suporn Koetsawang1
, Suwanee Srisupandit1
, and Lynda Painter Cole2
1
Siriraj Family Planning Research Unit, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Siriraj Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand
2
International Fertility Research Program, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA
ABSTRACT
Koetsawang, S., Srisupandit, S. and Cole, L. P. (Siriraj Family
Planning Research Unit, Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Siriraj Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand, and the International Fertility Research Program, Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina, USA). Laparoscopic electrocoagulation and the tubal
ring techniques for sterilization: a comparative study.
Int J Gynaecol Obstet 15: 455-458, 1978
From August 1975 through May 1976, a comparative study
was made of the effects of sterilization by standard electrocoagulation and tubal ring application techniques. The two
techniques were randomly assigned to 300 patients. Results
show that standard electrocoagulation and tubal ring procedures can easily and safely be performed on an outpatient
basis, using local anesthetics and analgesics. Rates of surgical
complications for both techniques were clinically acceptable,
although tubal ring patients had a higher rate. Pain during the
procedure and during the immediate recovery period was more
severe for tubal ring patients. Despite the higher incidence of
surgical complications and pain associated with the ring, many
physicians prefer this method of sterilization because it
eliminates the possibility, inherent in electrocoagulation, of inadvertent serious electrical burns.
INTRODUCTION
Laparoscopic female sterilization is a relatively
safe, short operation with minimal complications
and low mortality (8). In addition, it can be performed as an outpatient procedure using local
anesthetics.
The standard laparoscopic technique of tubal occlusion has been electrocoagulation with unipolar
forceps. The risk of burns to the bowel and other
organs, although small (6), has led to the development of bipolar electrocoagulation forceps (7) and
such nonelectrical occlusive devices as the clip (3)
and the tubal ring (9). Theoretically, the newer
mechanical devices should be safer for the patient
and increase the chances of reversibility (since a
smaller portion of the tube is damaged).
This paper was presented at the Ninth World Congress of Fertility and Sterility, Miami Beach, Florida, April 13, 1977.
This study evaluated the safety, effectiveness and
ease of performance of laparoscopic sterilization by
the tubal ring technique as compared with standard
electrocoagulation.
METHODS AND MATERIALS
From August 1975 through May 1976, a comparative study of standard electrocoagulation and
application of the tubal ring for tubal occlusion was
conducted at the Siriraj Hospital in Bangkok,
Thailand. Data from this study were recorded on
standard forms designed to obtain information on
selected socio-demographic characteristics of the
patients, the medical aspects of the sterilization procedures and complications and other events occurring from the time of surgery to 12 months after
sterilization.
The two techniques were randomly assigned to
300 patients. One operator performed all surgical
procedures; another physician, who was unaware of
the specific technique performed, provided
postoperative and follow-up care. All procedures
were performed on an outpatient basis for women
who had not recently been pregnant. Only women
requesting sterilization for family planning purposes were included in the study. Patients were
scheduled for three follow-up visits after surgery: at
7-21 days, 6 months and 12 months.
The tubal ring (Fig. 1) is a 2.0 mm-thick band of
siliconized rubber with an inner diameter of 1.0 mm
and an outer diameter of 3.6 mm. A specially designed tubal ring applicator with grasping forceps
(Fig. 2) is used to apply the ring to the tube.
The unipolar Electrocom 120 (Martin Bicomatic)
was the unit used for electrocoagulation.
Prior to sterilization, a complete medical history,
physical and pelvic examinations, and laboratory
tests (including chest x-ray, urinalysis, hematocrit
and Papanicolaou smear) were done for each patient.
The patient was instructed to give herself an enema
Int J Gynaecol Obstet 15 
456 S. Koetsawang et al.
Fig. I. Tubal ring (scale ¡n ¡nches).
Flg. 2. Tubal ring applicator (KLI, Inc., Ivyland, Penn.,
USA).
on the morning of the operation and to come to the
hospital without breakfast. She voided immediately
before surgery. A combination of 100.0 mg of
pethidine and 2.5 mg of droperidol was administered
intravenously about 10 minutes before surgery (the
dose was adjusted slightly for markedly overweight
or underweight patients).
After the patient was prepared for surgery,
draped and placed in the Trendelenburg position,
10-20 ml of 1% lidocaine was injected into the abdominal wall subumbilically. Pneumoperitoneum
was created with 1-2 liters of carbon dioxide. Both
study procedures were performed via a single incision.
When electrocoagulation was the assigned procedure, the laparoscope was inserted, and the tube
was grasped with a biopsy forceps. The tube was
coagulated and divided, and the two cut ends were
then recoagulated. When the tubal rings were used,
the ring applicator was inserted to permit the grasping forceps to pick up the isthmic portion of the
tube, 2-3 cm from the cornual area of the uterus. A
loop of the tube was drawn into the inner cylinder of
the applicator; the ring was applied to the loop by
movement of the outer cylinder of the applicator.
After all instruments were removed, the incision
was closed with a nylon suture. The patient walked
to the recovery room, and after 2-3 hours, she
returned home. Prophylactic antibiotics were provided for 5 days for all patients.
Int J Gynaecol Obstet 15
Patients were asked to rate pain experienced during surgery as none, mild, moderate, severe or very
severe.
RESULTS
Women assigned the tubal ring technique had
selected socio-demographic characteristics similar
to those of women assigned the electrocoagulation
techniques. There were no statistically significant
differences. The mean age of patients in both study
groups was approximately 31 years, the mean parity was 3.4, and the mean educational level was
about 5 years. Before sterilization, oral contraceptives were used by 58.6% of the electrocoagulation
patients and 68.0% of the tubal ring patients.
Abnormal pelvic findings, usually cervical erosion, were reported for 28.7% of the tubal ring patients and 35.3% of the electrocoagulation patients.
Chronic pelvic infection was reported for 6.7% of the
tubal ring patients and 10.0% of the electrocoagulation patients.
Technical failure occurred when the assigned procedure could not be completed. Two patients who
were assigned the tubal ring technique had the procedure completed by electrocoagulation. In one case,
the patient's mesosalpinx was torn by the ring applicator. The bleeding was stopped by electrocoagulation. The second patient had such a thick
abdominal wall that the trocar was not long enough
for the ring application. These patients were excluded from analysis of postsurgical complications and
complaints.
For two patients, the assigned technique of electrocoagulation, division and recoagulation of the cut
ends could be performed on only one tube because of
edema or hydrosalpinx; the other tube was occluded
by electrocoagulation alone.
Surgical time was measured from the initial incision to final closure. Mean surgical time was 6.5
minutes for the tubal ring procedures and 6.8
minutes for the electrocoagulation procedures. The
difference was not statistically significant.
Surgical difficulties were defined as problems that
occurred during the laparoscopic procedure. The
rate of surgical difficulties was significantly higher
(p<0.07) for the tubal ring (12.0%) than for the electrocoagulation technique (6.0%), primarily as a
result of the fogging of the laparoscope lens during
the tubal ring procedures (Table I). Adhesions
caused the most frequent difficulty in the electrocoagulation cases.
Rates of surgical complications were similar for
the tubal ring and electrocoagulation procedures.
Complications occurred in two ring cases: in one
case, the mesosalpinx was torn by the ring 
applicator and the procedure was completed by
another technique; in the second case, the ring applicator caused a tear in the broad ligament, but no
bleeding occurred. There were four electrocoagulation cases with surgical complications. In three
cases, blood oozing from the tube necessitated additional electrocoagulation.
The severity of pain reported by patients during
sterilization was significantly higher (p< 0.001) for
the tubal ring procedures. Thirty-one electrocoagulation patients reported moderate or severe
pain (20.7%) compared to 61 tubal ring patients
(41.2%).
Complications and complaints were grouped by
the time of occurrence: during the recovery period,
within 7-21 days after discharge from the hospital,
or at 6 and 12 months after sterilization. A much
higher (p<0.001) proportion of the women who were
sterilized with the tubal ring (52.7%) than those
sterilized by electrocoagulation (16.0%) complained
of pelvic/abdominal pain in the recovery period
(Table II). Complaints of pelvic/abdominal pain immediately after hospital discharge, however, were
similar for the two groups.
Six-month follow-up was completed for all of the
tubal ring and electrocoagulation patients. No
pregnancies had occurred and no gynecologic
surgery was performed for patients in either group.
Cervical erosion was reported for 29.7% of the ring
and 30.9% of the electrocoagulation patients,
Table I. Surgical difficulties and complications by
planned technique of sterilization
Difficulties
Adhesions
Fogged lens
Patient movement
Edema of tubes
Hydrosalpinx
Thick abdominal wall
Procedures with one or
more surgical difficulties
Complications
Vomiting
Bleeding from mesosalpinx, broad ligament
or tube
Women with one or
more surgical complications
Electrocoagulation Tubal Ring
(N= 150) (N= 148)
No. % No. %
8
0
1
1
1
0
9
5.3
0.0
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.0
6.0
3
13
0
0
0
1
18
2.0
8.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.7
12.0
1 0.7 0 0.0
3 2.0 2 1.4
4 2.7 2 1.3
Electrocoagulation and tubal ring 457
figures similar to those found at the time of admission. About 48% of the tubal ring and 53% of the
electrocoagulation patients complained of occasional pelvic and/or back pain at the time of the
6-month follow-up visit.
Twelve-month follow-up was completed on 80
(54.1%) of the tubal ring and 80 (53.3%) of the electrocoagulation patients. No pregnancy or surgery
was reported. Occasional mild pelvic and back pain,
which did not require treatment, was reported by
58% of the ring patients and 59% of the electrocoagulation patients. One suspected case of
pelvic infection in the ring group was treated with
antibiotics; no hospitalization was required.
DISCUSSION
Our findings indicate that both tubal ring and
standard electrocoagulation techniques of
laparoscopic sterilization can be easily and safely
performed on an outpatient basis, using local
anesthetics plus analgesics. Although the planned
Table II. Patient complications and complaints by performed sterilization technique
Complications/complaints
during the recovery
period
Pelvic and/or
abdominal pain
Backache
Nausea, vomiting
General body pain
Women with one or
more complications
Women with one or
more complaints
Complications/complaints
immediately after hospital
discharge
Fever treated with
antibiotics
Pelvic and/or
abdominal pain
Backache
Distended abdomen
General body pain
Women with one or
more complications
Women with one or
more complaints
Electrocoagulation Tubal Ring
(N= 150) (N= 148)
No. % No. %
24
9
1
2
0
36
16.0
6.0
0.7
1.3
0.0
24.0
78
16
1
4
0
99
52.7
10.8
0.7
2.7
0.0
66.9
0.7
27.3
10.7
6.7
0.7
0.7
45.3
1
45
17
7
3
I
73
0.7
30.4
11.5
4.7
2.0
0.7
49.3
Int J Gynaecol Obstei 15 
458 S. Koetsawang et al.
procedures could not be performed on two ring patients and two electrocoagulation patients, the ring
technical failures presented more of a problem
because a change to an alternate occlusion technique was required. For the two electrocoagulation
technical failures, only a modification of the
coagulation was required.
A higher rate of surgical difficulties, primarily
lens fogging, was experienced with the tubal ring
than with the electrocoagulation procedures.
Replacement of the tubal ring laparoscope corrected
this problem. A similar study has shown no difference in surgical difficulties (4).
Both techniques had clinically acceptable surgical
complication rates. No serious complications, such
as bowel or bladder injuries, occurred in this series.
Tubal and mesosalpinx tears occurred with the ring
applicator. Bleeding requiring recoagulation occurred with the electrocoagulation technique.
Similar findings were reported in Korea (4).
No pregnancies were reported for either group.
The two techniques were equally free of adverse
gynecologic effects for the first year after surgery;
no gynecologic surgery was reported.
Pain during the procedure and in the immediate
recovery period was more severe for patients
sterilized by the tubal ring. Other studies report
similar rates of pain during the recovery period for
women sterilized with mechanical devices (1, 2, 5);
however, these reports also indicate that electrocoagulation patients experience the same (1, 2) or
more intense pain (5) than do patients sterilized by
mechanical devices. By the time of the early followup visit, 7-21 days after surgery, ring and electrocoagulation patients reported similar rates of
pelvic pain.
Despite the higher incidence of surgical difficulties and pain associated with the tubal ring,
many physicians prefer the ring technique to electrocoagulation because it eliminates the possibility
of inadvertent serious electrical burns. There also
may be a greater potential for reversibility with the
ring technique because a smaller portion of the tube
is damaged.
Improvements in the prototype tubal ring applicator may eliminate some of the surgical problems such as fogging of the lens and tearing of the
tubes, just as improvements in bipolar electrocoagulation equipment may lessen the hazard of
inadvertent electrical burns.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by the International Fertility Research Program and the Office of
Population, United States Agency for International
Development (AID/pha-C-1172).
REFERENCES
1. Aranda, C, Broutin, A, Edelman, D A, Goldsmith, A,
Mangel, T, Prada, C & Solano, A: A comparative study of
electrocoagulation and tubal rings for tubal occlusion at
laparoscopy. Paper presented at the VIII World Congress
of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Mexico City, Mexico, October 17-23, 1976.
2. Koetsawang, S, Pachauri, S & Saha, A: A comparative
study of laparoscopic sterilization using cautery and
spring-loaded clips. Paper presented at the Second International Seminar on Maternal and Perinatal Mortality,
Pregnancy Termination and Sterilization, International
Federation of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Bombay, India,
March 3-5, 1975.
3. Kumarasamy, T, Hulka, J F, Mercer, J P, Fishburne, J F &
Omran, K F: Spring-clip tubal occlusion: a report of the first
400 cases. Fértil Steril 26.1116, 1975.
4. Kwak, H M, Song, C H & Saha, A: Laparoscopic sterilization by tubal ring and electrocoagulation. Paper presented
at the Second International Congress of Gynecologic Endoscopy, Las Vegas, Nevada, November 20-23, 1975.
5. Madrigal, V, Edelman, D A, Henriquez, E & Goldsmith, A:
A comparative study of spring-loaded clips and electrocoagulation for female sterilization. J Reprod Med 18:41,
1977.
6. McCann, M F: Laparoscopy versus minilaparotomy. Paper
presented at the PARFR Workshop on Risks, Benefits, and
Controversies in Fertility Control, Arlington, Virginia,
March 13-16, 1977.
7. Rioux, J E & Cloutier, D: Bipolar cautery for sterilization
by laparoscopy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 13:6, 1974.
8. Wortman, J & Piotrow, P T: Laparoscopic sterilization—II.
What are the problems? Population Report, Series C, No. 2,
March 1973.
9. Yoon, I B & King, T M: A preliminary and intermediate
report on a new laparoscopic tubal ring procedure. J Reprod
Med ¿5:54, 1975.
Address for reprints:
International Fertility Research Program
Research Triangle Park
North Carolina 27709
USA
Int J Gynaecol Obstet 15 