Randomized Comparison Between Two
Microlaparoscopic Techniques for
Partial Salpingectomy
John C. Siegle, MD, Laura J. Bishop, MD, William F. Rayburn, MD
ABSTRACT
Objective: We compared 2 techniques for performing a
partial salpingectomy by using microlaparoscopy and either bipolar coagulation or loop ligation.
Methods: A 3-mm transumbilical laparoscope with secondary midline port sites midway and suprapubically was
used to perform a partial salpingectomy in 109 women
desiring permanent sterilization. Each patient was randomly assigned to undergo a tubal resection either after
Pomeroy ligation (n54) or after bipolar coagulation with
Kleppinger forceps (n55). Postoperative pain, as assessed using a 10-point visual analog scale, was the primary comparison endpoint.
Results: No technical difficulties with either technique
required conversion to a minilaparotomy. The mean time
to remove both tubal segments was not different between
techniques (7 minutes, 21 seconds; range, 4 minutes, 25
seconds to 15 minutes, 43 seconds). Each segment (mean,
1.6 cm; range, 0.8 to 3.5 cm) was confirmed in the operating room, then histologically. Postoperative pain at 6
hours was scored similarly (median, ligation 4.6, coagulation 4.0 of 10). Outpatient recovery was the same, unless
pelvic pain required overnight observation (ligation, 4
patients; coagulation, 2 patients).
Conclusion: Partial salpingectomy, using microlaparoscopy with either bipolar coagulation or loop ligation, was
performed with comparable ease, confirmation of the removed tube, and similar postoperative discomfort.
Key Words: Sterilization, Salpingectomy, Microlaparoscopy.
INTRODUCTION
Over 170 million couples worldwide use surgical sterilization as a safe and reliable method of contraceptive.1 An
estimated 640 000 female sterilization procedures are performed annually in the United States.1 Many women
choose laparoscopic techniques as an outpatient means
for tubal coagulation or mechanical occlusion. Cumulative
10-year probabilities of pregnancy after bipolar coagulation (54.3/1000 procedures) and after mechanical occlusion (36.5/1000) are higher than failure rates described for
postpartum salpingectomies (7.5/1000).2
Female sterilization in which a portion of the fallopian
tube is removed offers the theoretical advantage of confirming transection and of reducing failure rates. In addition, the small size of a fascial defect, created by a microlaparoscopy trocar with a 3-mm diameter rather than a
5-mm or 10-mm diameter, may cause less patient discomfort and less risk of bowel herniation. Two microlaparoscopic techniques have been described to resect a tubal
segment either after bipolar coagulation or after ligation of
a loop of tube (Pomeroy).3,4 The objective of this randomized surgical trial was to compare the ease and limitations
in performing these 2 outpatient techniques for partial
salpingectomy.
METHODS
Written approval to undertake this trial was obtained from
our hospital Performance Improvement Counsel and
Board of Directors. Any patient requesting a tubal ligation
was eligible. Assuming that a 50% difference in pain
scores at 6 hours between techniques would be clinically
important, we calculated a sample size to be 42 in each
group for a 90% power and a 5% 2-sided significance
level.
All patients were counseled about tubal removal by the
microlaparoscopic method, with backup using minilaparotomy for any complication. The surgery would be performed using short-acting general anesthesia and endotracheal intubation. Each patient was also informed about
2 other options that involved standard laparoscopic techniques: bipolar coagulation without salpingectomy and
mechanical occlusion alone using Filshie clips.
Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Valley View Regional Hospital, Ada,
Oklahoma, USA (Dr Siegle)
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA
(all authors).
Presented at the 10th International Congress and Endo Expo 2001, SLS Annual
Meeting, New York, NY, December 5– 8, 2001
Address reprint requests to: John C. Siegle, MD, 413 N. Montevista, Ada, OK 74820,
USA. Telephone: 580 332 8855, Fax: 580 332 7374, E-mail: coder827@aol.com .
© 2005 by JSLS, Journal of the Society of Laparoendoscopic Surgeons. Published by
the Society of Laparoendoscopic Surgeons, Inc.
30 JSLS (2005)9:30 –34
SCIENTIFIC PAPER
Enrolled patients were randomized into 2 salpingectomy
groups after either bipolar coagulation or Pomeroy ligation groups before salgingectomy. A computer-generated
randomization code was prepared by a co-author (WFR),
and technique assignment was written on a card placed in
the sealed opaque envelope. The next consecutively numbered envelope was opened after obtaining patient consent and once she was transferred to the operating room.
Third-year residents in obstetrics and gynecology performed the procedure under direct supervision of the
senior author (JCS).
The same microlaparoscopic procedure was performed
until the tube was grasped. Placement of the 3 port sites
and instruments are illustrated in Figure 1. A small vertical incision (5 mm) was made deeply just below the
umbilicus. A 3-mm trocar was passed into the abdominal
cavity to create a pneumoperitoneum by insufflating with
carbon dioxide. The 3-mm laparoscope was inserted
through the same incision after placement of a trocar
sleeve. The patient was placed in a Trendelenberg position, and a second midline port (5 mm) was created
suprapubically. Subsequently, a 3-mm trocar was inserted
through the midline abdominal wall approximately 8cm
above the pubis. Each fallopian tube was visualized. No
local anesthetics were applied at the portal sites or at the
tubal ligation site. Any adhesions near the tubes were
lysed with sharp dissection. A partial salpingectomy was
then performed following either bipolar coagulation or
Pomeroy ligation.
Bipolar Coagulation
The ampullary-isthmic portion of the tube was grasped
using a rigid endoscopic grasper inserted through the
midway trocar site. The surgical assistant elevated the tube
under tension. Kleppinger bipolar forceps were inserted
through the suprapubic trocar. The surgeon then cauterized the proximal portion of the tube, approximately 2 cm
from the uterine cornua using 25 W of cutting current.4 An
ammeter was used to ensure adequate desiccation. This
cauterized segment of the tube was transected using laparoscopic scissors inserted through the same suprapubic
trocar. The tube was then cauterized and transected in the
same fashion approximately 3 cm distally. The mesosalpinx between the 2 incision sites was then cauterized, and
the tubal segment was excised completely (Figure 2).
Pomeroy Ligation
An 18-inch 0-chromic endoloop suture (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ) was inserted into the pelvic cavity through the
suprapubic port. The endoscopic grasper, inserted
through the midway trocar site, was passed through the
endoloop to grasp the ambulatory-isthmic portion of each
tube. As the assistant elevated the tube, the surgeon
slowly closed the endoloop around approximately 2 cm to
3 cm of the tube, then cut the remaining suture. The loop
of tube above the suture was resected using scissors
passed through the suprapubic trocar (Figure 2).
Using either technique, the assistant elevated the tube
toward the midline, well away from the bladder, intestine,
and pelvic sidewall. A 1-cm to 2-cm segment of resected
tube was removed from the abdomen under direct visualization with an endoscopic grasper through the suprapubic site. The operative site was re-inspected for hemostasis and, if necessary, was cauterized with the
Kleppinger forceps passed through the suprapubic site.
The same procedure was preformed on the contralateral
fallopian tube. Both specimens were inspected and, if
desired, cannulated with a lacrimal probe to assure adequacy of resection. All instruments were then removed,
and carbon dioxide gas was expelled from the abdominal
cavity. We did not suture any port site; instead, a bandage
was placed over the skin. The tubal specimens were sent
for histologic confirmation.
We observed that moderate discomfort is encountered
shortly after a laparoscopic ligation. A hand-held 10-point
visual analogue pain score (from 0no pain to 10excruciating pain) was used for the patient to assign a pain
score at 6 hours and at 14 days postoperatively. PrelimiFigure 1. Placement of port sites for the 3-mm laparoscope
subumbilically, grasping forceps midway, and either Kleppinger
forceps or endoloop instrument suprapubically.
JSLS (2005)9:30 –34 31
nary work indicated that a median pain score of 5 was
found commonly with the ligation technique at 6 hours
postoperatively. Secondary measurable endpoints were
additional, operative time (from grasping the tube originally to removing the tubal segment), mesosalpingeal
tears, length of tubal segment removed, and preference by
each resident physician.
Data were reported either as a mean percentage or as a
mean  standard deviation. Statistical comparisons between the 2 techniques were conducted with either chisquare analysis, the Student t test, or Mann-Whitney analysis where appropriate. Comparisons were made using a
Graph Pad InStat, Version 3 program (San Diego, CA). A P
value 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
RESULTS
All 109 eligible women consented to this investigation
between July 1999 and June 2001. Eighty-nine patients
underwent microlaparoscopic sterilization only. Twenty
patients underwent other planned procedures that included lysis of adhesions (8 patients), ovarian cystectomy
(5 patients), cholecystectomy (3 patients), myomectomy
(2 patients), or loop electrosurgical excision procedure
(LEEP) procedure of the cervix (2 patients). These additional procedures were conducted before the salpingectomy.
The patients were randomized either to the tubal coagulation group (55 patients) or to the ligation group (54
patients). The patients’ ages averaged 30.2 years (range 22
to 42). Patients weighed more in the coagulation group
than in the ligation group (163 pounds vs 183 pounds,
P0.05). The racial distribution was 83% non-Hispanic
white, 11% African American, and 6% other. Twenty
women had prior abdominal operations (ligation 8, coagulation 12).
Visualization through the 3-mm laparoscope was adequate in all cases. Adhesions were recorded as being
severe in 6 ligation cases and in 4 coagulation cases. Each
tube was identified, and a segment was removed without
need for a minilaparotomy. No differences were found
between groups in the time to remove the tube and in the
length of the tube removed. The mean cumulative time to
perform the procedure was 7 minutes, 50 seconds (range:
4 minutes, 15 seconds to 15 minutes, 38 seconds) in the
ligation group and 6 minutes, 47 seconds (range: 4 minutes, 26 seconds to 16 minutes, 3 seconds) in the coagulation group. The mean length of removed tubal segment
measured 1.6 cm (range: 0.8 to 3.5). A full cross-section of
the tubes was identified grossly and confirmed histologically in all patients.
Injury at puncture sites or inadvertent coagulation of vital
structures was not observed. The minimal mesosalpingeal
bleeding (5 mL) in 9 patients (ligation 4, coagulation 5)
was attributable to release of adhesions rather than to the
salpingectomy. Successful hemostasis with the Kleppinger
forceps required 1 additional minute.
Pain at incision sites or in the pelvis was described by the
patient as being usually mild or moderate 6 hours postoperatively (mean score: 4.6 out of 10 for ligation, 4.0 of
Figure 2. A microlaparoscopically directed partial salpingectomy involves either coagulating the proximal and distal midportion of the tube (A) or a loop of suture placed around the
base of a loop of fallopian tube (B). The operative site should be
reinspected for transected edges of the tubal segments and for
hemostasis of the mesosalpinx.
Randomized Comparison Between Two Microlaparoscopic Techniques for Partial Salpingectomy, Siegle JC et al.
32 JSLS (2005)9:30 –34
10 for coagulation) except in 6 patients (ligation 4, coagulation 2) that required overnight admission for parenteral
morphine or meperidine. Patients requiring mesosalpingeal cautery were not at greater risk for additional postoperative pain. By 14 postoperative days, 2 patients in the
ligation group and none in the coagulation group described having persistent mild pelvic pain (score 2 or 3 of
10).
The 3 small portal sites healed well in all cases and were
barely visible at the 6-week postoperative visit. No known
pregnancies were reported to our office during the postoperative 24 to 48 months.
Each senior resident performed either technique on at
least 4 occasions. The additional time to perform the
surgery was not statistically shortened between the first
and final case. Visualization through the 3-mm laparoscope did not impair the surgery. Each resident confirmed
removal of the tube on gross inspection. None preferred
either technique by the end of each 11-week rotation.
DISCUSSION
Female tubal sterilization is the most common form of
birth control in the United States.6 We describe in the
current study 2 microlapascopic sterilization techniques
that may carry a lower failure rate because of removal
rather than occlusion of a mid-tubal segment. Both techniques were easy to perform by resident physicians as
supervised by the primary author. Neither technique required more time nor led to removal of less fallopian tube.
Each technique had its own advantages and limitations.
Use of bipolar, rather than unipolar, coagulation should
limit the risk of thermal intestinal injury.7 Our experience
with 115 patients, reported here and previously, revealed
no technical difficulties.4 Removal of the tube segment
was accompanied with varying degrees of thermal artifact
and a nearby loss of cellular detail. It was, however,
possible to verify removal of a complete portion of fallopian tube in all cases. Separation of the remaining proximal and distal tubal segments simulated a partial salpingectomy that is performed customarily at the time of a
cesarean delivery. Separating the exposed tubal edges by
at least 2.5 cm may lead to a very low failure rate similar
to the failure rate with a Parkland salpingectomy (2.5/1000
procedures).8
The noncautery ligation technique using an endoloop
suture was described by Murray et al3 in 28 participants
and by Hibbert et al9 in 38 subjects. Those investigators
removed a slightly shorter mean tubal segment (1.3 cm
rather than 1.6 cm). Compared with the coagulation technique, more room in the pelvic cavity is necessary to
apply the endoloop around the base of the elevated tube
than to cauterize the tube by using bipolar coagulation.
This requirement for additional pelvic space was unimportant unless adhesions prohibited mobility of the tube.
When visualization of the elevated tube was unobstructed, the ligation technique required slightly less time
than the coagulation technique although this difference
was not statistically significant.
Mesosalpingeal bleeding in 10% of cases was attributed to
sharp dissection of adhesions rather than to the salpingectomy alone. Additional precautions to minimize the risk of
bleeding included placing the scissors tips either within
the cauterized area or well above the endoloop suture.
Kleppinger forceps were on the operating room table for
either technique to coagulate any bleeding sites.
Both techniques permitted gross confirmation of the removed tube segment by our residents.10 The only additional cost associated with either technique was histologic
confirmation of the tubal segments. We consider this additional charge ($60 by our pathology service) to be
worthwhile, when viewed from a liability perspective in
the case of a sterilization failure.
This investigation was not intended to review the contraceptive efficacy of these sterilization techniques, because
the small number of patients was only followed up for 48
months postoperatively. Separation of tube segments with
the bipolar coagulation technique may be more desirable
when one considers the possibility of spontaneous reanastamosis or fistula formation when crushed tubal segments with the ligation method heal in close proximity to
each other. It should also be appreciated that surgical
reversal is less possible with removal of longer tubal
segments. Either salpingectomy technique is, therefore,
not usually recommended in women who are either
young or of low parity.
Findings from this randomized surgical trial are promising.
Either procedure is technically feasible without adding
much additional time to remove the tubal segment. Use of
smaller-diameter instruments avoids the need for incisional closure and leads to the formation of very small
scars at the port sites. Pain from the 3 puncture sites and
from partial salpingectomy was usually well tolerated.
More experience is necessary to report the incidence of
less common complications (such as injury to nearby
pelvic structures or need for laparotomy) and to confirm
our suspicion that the failure rate is lower with a partial
salpingectomy than with tubal occlusion alone.
JSLS (2005)9:30 –34 33
References:
1. Sterilization. Am Coll Obstet Gynecol Tech Bull. 1996;222:
1–3.
2. Peterson HB, Zhisen X, Hughes JM, Wilcox LS, Taylor LR,
Trussell T. The risk of pregnancy after tubal sterilization findings
from the U.S. Collaborative Review of Sterilization. Am J Obstet
Gynecol. 1996;194:1161–1170.
3. Murray J, Hibbert ML, Heth SR, Letterie GS. A technique for
laparoscopic Pomeroy tubal ligation with endoloop sutures. Obstet Gynecol. 1992;80:1053–1055.
4. Siegle JC, Cartmell LW, Rayburn WF. Microlaparoscopic
technique for partial salpingectomy using bipolar electrocoagulation. J Reprod Med. 2001;46:632– 636.
5. Kleppinger RK. Laparoscopy tubal sterilization. In: Garcia
CR, Mikuata JJ, Rosenblum NJ, eds. Current Therapy in Surgical
Gynecology. Philadelphia, PA: BC Decker; 1987:80 – 86.
6. Peterson LS. Contraceptive use in the United States: 1982–
90. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics; 1995.
Advance Data From Vital and Health Statistics, No. 260.
7. Soderstrom RM, Levy BS, Engel T. Reducing bipolar sterilization failures. Obstet Gynecol. 1989;74:60 – 63.
8. Cunningham FG, Gant NF, Leveno KJ, Gilstrap LC, Hauth JC,
Wenstrom KD, eds. Sterilization. In: Williams Obstetrics. 21st ed.
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill;2001:1557.
9. Hibbert ML, Buller TL, Seymour SD, Poore SE, David GD. A
microlaparoscopic technique for Pomeroy tubal ligation. Obstet
Gynecol. 1997;90:249 –251.
10. Stovall TG, Ling FW, O’Kelley KR, Coleman SA. Gross and
histologic examination of tubal ligation failures in a residencytraining program. Obstet Gynecol. 1990;76:461– 465.
Randomized Comparison Between Two Microlaparoscopic Techniques for Partial Salpingectomy, Siegle JC et al.
34 JSLS (2005)9:30 –34