Original research article
Randomized trial to compare perioperative outcomes of Filshie clip vs.
Pomeroy technique for postpartum and intraoperative cesarean tubal
sterilization: a pilot study
Bettina A. Kohaut, B. Lynn Musselman*, Luis Sanchez-Ramos, Andrew M. Kaunitz
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Florida Health Science Center/Jacksonville, 3627 University Boulevard South, Suite #355,
Jacksonville, FL 32216, USA
Received 20 November 2003; received in revised form 17 December 2003; accepted 18 December 2003
Abstract
Objective: To compare, by conducting a randomized trial, Filshie clip and Pomeroy techniques for postpartum and intrapartum cesarean
sterilizations in a United States teaching hospital with respect to surgeon preference and perioperative outcomes.
Method: Thirty-two obstetric patients consented for sterilization were randomized to Pomeroy technique or Filshie clip placement.
Following the surgical procedure, surgeons and operating room technicians completed a survey regarding their experience with the
procedures and preference. Patient demographic data, time for procedure and follow-up visits were obtained by chart review.
Results: For most postpartum sterilizations, the mean duration of the procedure was almost 7 min faster for the Filshie clip technique (p
 0.08); perioperative outcomes were equivalent (p  0.05). Application of the Filshie clip was rated easier than Pomeroy suture application
and, overall, the Filshie clip sterilization procedure was rated less difficult (p  0.03). Seventy percent of surgeons preferred the Filshie clip
technique and would choose it if only one postpartum sterilization method was available.
Conclusion: For obstetric sterilization, surgeons preferred the Filshie clip over the Pomeroy technique. In addition, operating time was
shorter for the Filshie clip. This pilot study suggests that use of the Filshie clip technique has the potential to establish a new standard of
care for postpartum and intrapartum cesarean sterilization. © 2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Postpartum sterilization; Filshie clip
1. Introduction
Surgical sterilization represents an important approach to
contraception worldwide, including in the United States.
More than 350,000 obstetric sterilization procedures are
performed following vaginal or cesarean delivery in the
United States annually [1]. In the United States, the great
majority of obstetric sterilizations are Pomeroy, a technique
that has not been modified since it was developed in 1930
[2].
Pomeroy tubal sterilization involves placing a plain catgut suture around a loop of tube and resecting the knuckled
portion of the tube. Potential disadvantages of Pomeroy
sterilization relate to the need to exteriorize the fallopian
tubes during postpartum sterilization as well as the potential
for mesosalpingeal hemorrhage.
The Filshie clip, invented by the British obstetriciangynecologist, Marcus Filshie, and distributed by Avalon
Medical Corporation in the United States, is a titanium clip
lined with a Silastic cushion. The cushion facilitates occlusion of edematous and friable fallopian tubes found more
commonly in the immediate postpartum period. Other advantages of the Filshie clip include minimum damage to the
tube and surrounding structures, as well as ease and speed of
operation. Furthermore, successful tubal reversal may be
greater following Filshie clip placement than following
Pomeroy sterilization [3].
Used worldwide, Filshie clips (marketed in the United
States since 1996) are approved in the United States both for
laparoscopic and obstetric sterilization use. Studies conducted in Europe [4], Asia [5] and Latin America support
the safety and efficacy of Filshie clip obstetric sterilization.
However, no reports have been published describing the

Presented at the 2003 ARHP Annual Meetings, La Jolla, CA, USA.
* Corresponding author. Tel.: 1-904-858-6974.
E-mail address: bobbie.musselman@jax.ufl.edu (B.L. Musselman).
Contraception 69 (2004) 267–270
0010-7824/04/$ – see front matter © 2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.contraception.2003.12.007
use of Filshie clips in US obstetric sterilization patients. The
objectives of this pilot study, therefore, were to compare
surgeon and obstetric technician impression, preference and
perioperative outcomes between two postpartum obstetric
tubal sterilization techniques—Pomeroy technique and
Filshie clip placement.
2. Materials and methods
From November 13, 2002, until January 12, 2003, 32
obstetric patients who were at least 21 years of age and who
expressed a desire to undergo permanent surgical sterilization immediately following their delivery at Shands Jacksonville Medical Center, Jacksonville, Florida were identified. Patients were included if they consented for
sterilization after vaginal or cesarean delivery and provided
informed consent to participate in the study. Informed consent for study participants was also obtained from participating surgeons (all resident and attending physicians performing postpartum sterilizations at Shands Jacksonville
Medical Center) as well as all operating room technicians
assisting with postpartum sterilizations, prior to participating in the study. The protocol for this study was approved
by the Institutional Review Board of the University of
Florida Health Science Center/Jacksonville.
Patients were randomized into two groups for their postpartum tubal sterilization, Pomeroy technique vs. Filshie
clip placement, by using a standard computer randomization
program. A sealed manila envelope was opened just prior to
performing the sterilization, assigning patients to either the
Pomeroy or Filshie group.
General, epidural or spinal anesthesia was used for all
subjects. An approximately 2–3-cm infra-umbilical skin incision was made with the scalpel and, following entry into
the peritoneal cavity, the fallopian tubes were brought to the
surface with either Babcock clamps or forceps. Likewise,
tubes were identified after cesarean delivery. A Filshie clip
was then applied to the isthmic portion of the tube using a
short Filshie clip applicator (Fig. 1) while ensuring fullthickness tubal application. Or, in the case of Pomeroy
technique, tubal occlusion was achieved by ligating an isthmic portion of the tube with 2-0 plain gut suture. The
knuckle of the tube was then excised above the ligature.
This portion of tube was sent to pathology for identification
and confirmation of complete tubal transection. After confirming hemostasis, the abdominal wall and skin were
closed with sutures. For postpartum sterilizations, the time
from skin incision to closure of the skin incision were
recorded and compared for Pomeroy and Filshie techniques.
Following the surgical procedure, the surgeon and the
operating room technician performing and assisting in the
procedure completed a brief survey regarding their experience with the procedure, including ease of instrument preparation and application of suture vs. clip, ease of tubal
identification, as well as personal preference.
Once patient data collection was completed, all participating surgeons and operating room technicians were asked
to complete a second brief survey regarding their gender,
level of training and approximate number of study procedures performed. They were also asked to state whether they
preferred one procedure over the other and which one they
would choose to use if only one method was available.
At Shands Jacksonville, postpartum visits are routinely
scheduled 6 weeks after uncomplicated vaginal deliveries
and at 2, as well as 6 weeks after cesarean delivery. Patient
charts were reviewed 6 or more weeks after sterilization.
Sociodemographic and medical data were collected on standard forms. The data were analyzed using the Mann–Whitney U test and unpaired t test.
Fig. 1. Minilap applicator and Filshie clip.
268 B.A. Kohaut et al. / Contraception 69 (2004) 267–270
3. Results
During a 2-month period, 32 patients undergoing postpartum sterilization consented to participate in the study. Of
these, 14 were randomized to the Filshie group and 16 to the
Pomeroy group. One patient was randomized to the Filshie
clip group and sterilized by the Pomeroy Method. This
patient presented after a failed sterilization procedure. The
presence of clips was noted in the operative report, however, type and location were not specified. Therefore, this
patient was excluded from analysis secondary to this protocol violation. Two randomized study participants’ questionnaires could not be located and were therefore excluded.
The randomly assigned study groups, Pomeroy vs.
Filshie clip, were similar with regard to age, parity, past
medical and surgical history as well as type of delivery and
anesthesia (Table 1). There were no surgical complications.
Histologic analysis indicated that all specimens obtained by
the Pomeroy method were confirmed to be complete crosssections of fallopian tubes.
Ten surgeons participated in the study. All but one tubal
sterilization was performed by a postgraduate year (PGY) 1
resident supervised and assisted by a PGY 4 resident. One
procedure was performed by a PGY 2 resident. All procedures were performed on the day of delivery or first postpartum day.
The surgeon survey revealed no difference between perceived ease of entry into peritoneal cavity, tubal identification and exteriorization (Table 2). Although Filshie clip
application was rated easier than application of suture in the
Pomeroy technique (Table 2), this difference was not statistically significant. The overall ease of the procedure was
rated higher when the Filshie clip technique was used (p 
0.03). Operating room technicians surveyed perceived
Filshie clip technique and Pomeroy method to be equal in
regard to preparing for and assisting in the procedure (Table
2). Among sterilizations performed following vaginal deliveries, the mean duration of the procedure was 19.9  4.2
min. for the Filshie group and 26.6  10.0 min. for the
Pomeroy group (p  0.08).
The secondary survey, conducted after the completion of
all study procedures, was completed by all participating
surgeons and operating room technicians. Seven of these 10
surgeons preferred one sterilization method over the other,
and these surgeons indicated they would choose the Filshie
clip if only one postpartum tubal sterilization method was
available. Three of 10 surgeons indicated they had no preference for either sterilization technique and would choose
the Pomeroy technique if only one method was available.
All operating room technicians stated that they preferred
one method over the other and 80% would choose the
Filshie clip method if only one method was available. Our
institution recorded no emergency department or clinic visits by any of the study patients by 6 weeks postpartum.
4. Discussion
No other reports have described the use of Filshie clips
for sterilization in US obstetric patients. This pilot study
Table 1
Study participant characteristics, route of delivery and type of anesthesia
Characteristics Filshie clip
(n  14)
Pomeroy
(n  15)
Age (y) 26.1  6.4 28.3  5.9
Total living children 3.9  2.7 3.5  1.4
Prior STD 4 (29) 1 (6.67)
Prior PID 0 0
Prior abdominal surgery 3 (21) 5 (33.3)
Route of delivery
Vaginal 12 (86) 13 (86.7)
Cesarean 2 (14) 2 (13.3)
Type of anesthesia:
Spinal 6 (43) 8 (53.3)
Epidural 8 (57) 6 (40.0)
General 0 1 (6.67)
Data are presented as mean  standard deviation and n (%). STD 
sexually transmitted disease; PID  pelvic inflammatory disease.
Table 2
Results of surgeon and operating room technician questionnaires
Filshie clip
(n  14)
Pomeroy
(n  15)
p-valuea
Surgical technician questionnaire
Ease of applicator preparation (Filshie) vs. ease
of preparation for Pomeroy technique
1.07  0.27 1.08  0.28 (n  12) 0.98
Ease of assisting in procedure 1.29  0.61 1.85  1.46 (n  12) 0.64
Surgeon questionnaire
Ease of entry into peritoneal cavity 1.71  0.83 2.5  1.97 0.51
Ease of tubal identification 1.57  0.85 2.19  2.19 0.63
Ease of tubal exteriorization 3.00  0.44 2.34  1.21 (n  10) 0.97
Ease of clip/suture application 1.07  0.27 2.29  2.58 (n  14) 0.08
Ease of procedure, overall 1.14  0.36 2.60  1.88 0.03
Data are presented as mean  standard deviation. Questionnaire scale from 1 to 5: 1  very easy, 5  very difficult. a Mann–Whitney U test.
B.A. Kohaut et al. / Contraception 69 (2004) 267–270 269
shows the Filshie clip to be a practical alternative to the
traditional Pomeroy technique. The safety and efficacy of
this procedure has previously been reported [4,5]. In this
study, perioperative outcomes were comparable, and no
complications were noted in either group.
Due to the easy application technique with Filshie clip
use, this study found the Filshie clip to be the method
preferred by surgeons trained in both the traditional
Pomeroy method as well as the Filshie clip postpartum
sterilization technique. This pilot study identifies the Filshie
clip method to be superior in the overall ease of application
as perceived by the surgeons. Furthermore, the majority of
surgeons surveyed would use the Filshie clip exclusively if
only one method was available.
Although this study found the Filshie clip to be a quicker
alternative to the Pomeroy technique, with the potential
advantages of less operating time and anesthesia, this difference did not achieve statistical significance, likely reflecting a Type II error (i.e., small sample size). Another
potential advantage of the Filshie technique, not demonstrated in this pilot study, is that tubal exteriorization is not
required. This advantage might apply to obese patients and
those with tubal adhesions.
In conclusion, this pilot study suggests that obstetric
sterilization with the Filshie clip represents a quicker, easier
alternative when compared with the Pomeroy method. Accordingly, the Filshie clip has the potential to become a new
standard of care for postpartum and intrapartum cesarean
sterilization.
Acknowledgments
Avalon Medical Corporation provided Filshie clips, applicators and funding that partially supported this clinical
trial.
References
[1] Westhoff C, Davis A. Tubal sterilization: focus on the U.S. experience.
Fertil Steril 2000;73:913–22.
[2] Bishop E, Nelms WF. A simple method of tubal sterilization. NY State
J Med 1930;3:214–6.
[3] Chi IC, Gates D, Thapa S. Performing tubal sterilizations during
women’s postpartum hospitalization: a review of the United States and
international experiences. Obstet Gynecol Surv 1992;47:71–9.
[4] Graf AH, Staudach A, Steiner H, Spitzer D, Martin A. An evaluation
of the Filshie clip for postpartum sterilization in Austria. Contraception
1996;54:309–11.
[5] Yan JS, Hsu J, Yin CS. Comparative study of Filshie clip and Pomeroy
methods for postpartum sterilization. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 1990;33:
263–7.
270 B.A. Kohaut et al. / Contraception 69 (2004) 267–270