q1998 Blackwell Science Ltd Gynaecological Endoscopy 1998 7, 333–334 333
CASE REPORT
Torsion of a Filshie clip presenting as an acute abdomen
Nicole C. S. Ong, John R. Higgins and Jeffrey H.-J. Tan
Royal Women’s Hospital, Melbourne. Victoria, Australia
ABSTRACT
An acute abdomen is a common diagnostic problem for physicians. A case is
presented in which a Filshie clip had undergone torsion resulting in the
presentation of an acute abdomen. This unusual complication should be
considered in patients who present with abdominal pain following laparoscopic sterilization using Filshie clips.
Keywords
acute abdomen, Filshie clip, torsion.
Correspondence
N. C.-S. Ong, Royal Women’s Hospital, 132
Grattan Street, Carlton 3053, Victoria,
Australia.
Accepted 1 June 1998
INTRODUCTION
We present a rare complication of Filshie clip sterilization, i.e. torsion of the clip.
CASE REPORT
In September 1997, a 31-year-old woman presented with
a 6-week history of intermittent cramping right iliac
fossa/loin pain which occurred spontaneously; there
were no exacerbating or relieving factors. At 2 days
prior to admission, the pain had become constant
and severe and radiated around to the back. It was
associated with anorexia, nausea and vomiting. There
were no other bowel or urinary symptoms.
The patient’s previous history included four normal
vaginal deliveries, one missed abortion, and elective
laparoscopic tubal ligation using Filshie clips in
March 1995. Review of the laparoscopist’s notes and
contemporaneous medical records did not suggest any
pelvic pathology, operative difficulties or postoperative
complications.
On examination the patient was obviously distressed.
Her abdomen was soft but tender in the right iliac
fossa/loin. There was no guarding or rebound and
bowel sounds were present. Vaginal examination
revealed a markedly tender right adnexa but no masses
were felt.
The white cell count was 6.1 × 109 l
–1, the urine bhCG
test was negative and microscopic investigation of urine
showed no evidence of haematuria. Our differential
diagnosis included renal calculus, complication of an
ovarian/fimbrial cyst or appendicitis. Over the next
12 h the patient’s pain increased, despite her being
given narcotic analgesia on three occasions.
A diagnostic laparoscopy was performed. This
revealed that the right Filshie clip had cut through
the fallopian tube. It was covered in a film of fibrinous
tissue and attached to the stump of the fallopian tube by
a fine fibrous pedicle that had undergone torsion. The
fibrous covering appeared to be infarcted. (Fig. 1). The
ischaemic fibrinous tissue and Filshie clip were excised
using diathermy.
Our histological findings were of a bean-shaped piece
of smooth plum-coloured tissue measuring 19 × 8 ×
5 mm with a central metal staple. The 19-mm tissue
fragment consisted of fragments of reactive fibrous
tissue partly covered by an apparent layer of mesothelial
cells.
The lady made an uneventful recovery and was discharged the following day.
DISCUSSION
As far as we are aware, this is the first report of a Filshie
clip presenting as an acute abdomen.
The Filshie clip is approximately 12.7 mm long by
4 mm wide and made of hinged titanium jaws with an
inner silicone rubber lining. The effect of clip closure is
to immediately flatten the lumen, dividing the muscle
334 N. C. S. ONG et al.
but not the peritoneum. The endosalpinx is not
affected by clip closure. Tubal necrosis occurs under
the clip with eventual division. The stumps heal closed.
The rate of tubal transection with the Filshie clip is
around 1%.
The Filshie clip is usually surrounded by a connective
tissue sheath of densely packed collagen fibres and
fibroblasts. The sheath is usually 0.4 mm but may range
in thickness from 0.05 to 0.72 mm. There is no relationship between the thickness of the sheath and the length
of time that the clip has been in place. The sheath is
then overlain by peritoneum.
Complications associated with Filshie clip sterilization are few. A prospective trial, involving 300 women
requesting postpartum sterilization, was performed by
Graf et al.
1 to evaluate the Filshie clip. They concluded
that the complication rates were low and that application of Filshie clips is a safe and efficacious method of
sterilization. The complications were categorized as
those occurring at the time of surgery, those occurring
between surgery and discharge, and complications
occurring within the 24 months of follow up.
Complications included difficulty entering the peritoneum (3.2%), subcutaneous haematoma (0.4%), subcutaneous or cutaneous wound healing problems
(7.2%), and genital infections (1.6% at 6-week follow
up; 1.6% at 6 months and 4.3% at 12 months). There
had been no pregnancies among the women at 24
months after sterilization.
Interestingly, all the complications were found to be
related to the surgery and not to the Filshie clips per se.
A similar study in Singapore,2 on postpartum sterilization in 81 patients, reported that none of the women
complained of pelvic pain or dyspareunia but 29.6%
had mild dysmenorrhoea. A larger study by Filshie et al.
3
found that approximately 5% of women complained of
vague pelvic pain, not related to their menses, after
sterilization.
Laparoscopic sterilization offers the advantage of a
safe and simple operative procedure with a short stay in
hospital. Filshie clips have been demonstrated to cause
less cramping abdominal pain than silastic ring application. Approximately 71% of those sterilized with clips
will experience cramping pains 1 week after sterilization, compared with 94% when rings have been used.4
Our histological findings are consistent with previous
research. The clip was attached by a small vascular
pedicle that had undergone torsion. This unusual
complication should be considered in patients who
present with abdominal pain following laparoscopic
sterilization using Filshie clips.
REFERENCES
1 Graf AH, Staudach A, Steiner H, Spitzer D, Martin A. An
evaluation of the Filshie clip for postpartum sterilisation
in Austria. Contraception 1996; 54(5): 309–11.
2 Anandakumar C, Ilancheran A, Wong PC, Mylvaganam A.
The use of the Filshie clip for postpartum sterilisation in
Singapore. Singapore Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
1985; 16: 148–50.
3 Filshie GM, Casey D, Pogmore JR, Dutton AG, Symonds
EM, Peake AB. The titanium/silicone rubber clip for
female sterilisation. British Journal of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology 1981; 88(6): 655–62.
4 Geirsson RT, Currie J, Redpath A. A prospective
comparison of postoperative morbidity after laparoscopic
sterilisation with clips and rings. British Journal of Family
Planning 1985; 11: 55–9.
Gynaecological Endoscopy 1998 7, 333–334 q1998 Blackwell Science Ltd
Figure 1 Filshie clip with fibrous covering.