IntJ Gynaecol Obstet 14:411-415, 1976
A Comparative Study of Electrocoagulation and Tubal
Rings for Tubal Occlusion at Laparoscopy
CECILIO ARANDA, 1 ADOLOFO BROUTIN, 1 DAVID A. EDELMAN ,
2
ALFREDO GOLDSMITH, 2 TEODORO MANGEL,' CARLOS PRADA' and A. SOLANO'
From the 'Hospital Mexico, San Jos e, Costa Rica and 2
/nternational Fertility Research Program,
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA
ABSTRACT
Aranda, C., Broutin, A., Edelman, D. A., Goldsmith,
A., Mangel, T., Prada, C. and Sol ano, A. (Hospital
Mexico, San Jose, Costa Rica and International Fertility Research Program, Research Triangle Park, NC,
USA). A Comparative study of electrocoagulation and
tubal rings for tubal occlusion at laparoscopy.
lnt J Gynaecol Obstet 14:411-415,, 1976.
The surgical and early postoperative complications
and complaints associated with laparoscopic sterilization using electrocoagulation or tubal rings for tubal
occlusion were evaluated in a comparative study.
Procedures were randomly assigned to subjects
(electrocoagulation to 151 subjects and tubal rings to
148 subjects). Difficulties in carrying out the sterilization procedures occurred more frequently when tubal
rings were used (6.1 %) than when electrocoagulation
was used (2.0%). Rates of complications occurring at
the time of surgery were similar for the two procedures. However, one patient in the electrocoagulation
group had a bowel bum. Postoperative pelvic and abdominal pain were reported by a significantly higher
proportion of the tubal ring cases (32.0 %) than
electrocoagulation cases (19.4 %). It appears that although the incidence of surgical difficulties and pain
may be somewhat more frequent with the tubal ring,
the avoidance of such potentially serious complications as bowel bums may make female sterilization
by the tubal ring method preferable.
INTRODUCTION
Since laparoscopy for female sterilization was
introduced into the United States in the late
1960s, the technique has been refined and a
number of innovations have been incorporated
to make it safer and simpler. Although electrocoagulation alone and electrocoagulation with
division of the tubes continue to be the most
frequently used procedures for tubal occlusion at
laparoscopy (7), other techniques are being evaluated. These techniques include the laparoscopic application of spring-loaded clips (2) and
tubal rings (8). The principal advantage to both
of these mechanical techniques of tubal occlusion is that burns to the patient or surgeon from
the electrical systems can be avoided. Preliminary reports (3, 4, 8), not based on comparative studies, have indicated similar rates of
operative and postoperative complications for
these mechanical and electrocoagulation procedures.
This study was undertaken to evaluate the
operative and early postoperative complications
and complaints associated with the laparoscopic
application of tubal rings and electrocoagulation
and division. Pertinent data were analyzed from
299 patients undergoing laparoscopic sterilization.
METHODS AND MATERIALS
The relative safety and technical ease of performing
tubal occlusions with electrocoagulation or the application of tubal rings, were evaluated in a comparative study conducted at the Hospital Mexico in which
the two techniques were randomly assigned to subjects. Immediately before the laparoscopy the surgeon
opened a sealed envelope containing a card which
specified the technique of tubal occlusion. The
surgeon who performed the sterilization was never the
same physician as the one responsible for the patient's care and evaluation after her discharge from the
operating room. All patients were scheduled for follow-up visits one to three weeks after the sterilization.
Sterilization procedures
All laparoscopies were performed using a single incision procedure which has been described in other
reports (3, 5). Immediately before beginning the procelrtt J Gynaecol Obstet 14
II 
412 C. Aranda et al.
Fig. 1. Tubal ring applicator. Shown in the upper
portion of photograph is the tubal ring applicator with
grasping forceps extended . Lower portion of the
photograph shows a close-up view of the grasping forceps and tubal ring on the inner cylinder: Tubal ring
applicator manufactured by KLI, Inc ., 65 Industrial
Drive, Ivyland, Pennsylvania 18974.
dure, 2 or 3 cc of Thalamonal (Janssen Pharmaceutica,
Belgium, brand of fentanyl citrate 0.05 mg and droperidol 2.5 mg per cc) were injected intravenously,
and 10 to 20 cc of lidocaine were injected immediately below the umbilicus at the operative site. Pneumoperitoneum was achieved by the infusion of about
2 litres of C02 through the transabdominally-placed
Tuohy needle. If electrocoagulation was the assigned
procedure , each tube was grasped with the biopsy
forceps, electrocoagulated, and divided . If the tubal
ring was the assigned technique , a tubal ring was
loaded on the outer cylinder of the tubal ring applicator
and laparoscope (Fig. 1). After the isthmic portion of
the tube was grasped with the forceps, it was drawn
up into the inner cylinder of the laparoscope. The
tubal ring was applied over the segment of the tube
by releasing it from the inner cylinder, producing a
Madlener type of occlusion.
After the procedure was completed, the patient
usually rested in the recovery room for four to nine
hours before she was discharged from the hospital.
When it was inconvenient for the patient to return
home on the same day as the procedure, she remained
in the hospital overnight. A follow-up history and
physical examination were performed for all but one
patient from one to four weeks after the sterilization.
Subjects
Only women who requested sterilization for family
planning reasons and who were at least six weeks
postpartum were selected as subjects. Subjects in the
two groups (electrocoagulation or tubal ring) were
lnt J Gynaecol Obstet 14
similar with respect to selected socio-demographic
characteristics. Overall, 92.3% were currently
married , 21 .4% were less than 30 years of age (mean
age 33.1 years), and 47.4% were grand multiparas
(mean parity, 4.8 live births). All subjects had at least
one living child .
Definitions and criteria
Surgical difficulties were defined as problems that occurred during the laparoscopic procedure. Complaints
and complication s were grouped by when they occurred: during the sterilization procedure, during the
recovery period, or after discharge from the hospitaL
The two techniques of tubal occlusion were compared for: I) rates of surgical difficulties, 2) rates of
complications and complaints and 3) duration of hospitalization.
RESULTS
Surgical difficulties
The rates of surgical difficulties were higher
(p<O.lO) for the tubal ring (6.1 %) than for the
electrocoagulation technique (2.0%) primarily as
a result of difficulties in applying the rings and in
obtaining adequate visualization of the uterine
tube (Table I). The sterilization procedure was
not completed with the planned technique of
tubal occlusion in three ( 1.0%) patients (I
electrocoagulation, 2 tubal ring). The tubal ring
could not be applied to the second tube in one
patient because the tube could not be adequately
visualized as a result of pelvic adhesions. The
patient underwent laparotomy and a partial
salpingectomy and was excluded from subsequent analyses. Electrocoagulation or the application of tubal rings were used instead of the 
Electrocoagulation and tubal rings for tubal occlusion at laparoscopy 413
Table I. Surgical difficulties by planned technique of sterilization
Electrocoagulation Tubal ring
(N = 151) (N= I48)
Difficulties No. % No. %
Inducing pneumoperitoneum 0.7 2 1.4
Insertion of trocar 0.7 I 0.7
Inadequate visualization
of tubes 0 0.0 2 1.4
Application of tubal rings 3 2.0
Mechanical problems with laparoscope 0.7 0.7
Procedures with one or more surgical difficulties 3 2.0 9 6.1
planned procedure in th e other two patients because of mechanical difficulties with the laparoscope.
Surgical complica tions and complaints
Rates of surgical complications were simil ar
(p > O. IO) for electrocoagulation and tubal ring
cases (Table II). The only potentially serious
complication tha t required additional surgical
procedures and a prolonged hospital stay was a
burn of the small intestine which occurred and
was recognized during an electrocoagul ation
procedure. A laparotomy with bowel repair was
immed ia tely performed and th e pa tient was
treated with a ntibiotics (kanamycin sulfa te). She
recovered uneventfully and was discharged from
the hospital on her fifth postoperative day.
The degree of pain reported by patients during
th e sterili zation was simila r (p > O.IO) for the
Table II. Surgical complications by petformed
sterilization technique
Electrocoagulation Tubal ring
(N = 151) (N = 147)
Complication No. % No. %
Emphysema of abdominal
wall I 0.7 3 2.0
Cervical lace ration I 0.7 0 0.0
Vasovagal reaction 0 0.0 I 0.7
Tube inadvertently
transected I 0.7
Burn of small intestine 0.7 0 0.0
Patient with one or more complications 3 2.0 5 3.4
Table III . Degree of pain reported by patients
during sterilization procedure
Electrocoagulation Tubal ring
(N= l51) (N = I47)
Degree of pain No.
Mild 45
Moderate 9
Severe I
%
29.8
6.0
0.7
No.
42
14
I
%
28 .6
9.5
0.7
electrocoagul ation and tubal ring cases (Table
III). " Mild" to "moderate" pain was reported by
36.9 % of the pa tients, and only 0.7 % of the
patients reported "severe" pain.
Complications /complaints in the recovery
period
Except for abdominal/pelvi c pain , which was
reported by a significantly higher (p < O.IO) proportion of the tubal ring cases (32.0% vs.
19.4%), complications and compla ints during the
recovery period occurred infrequently (Table
£V). A significantl y higher (p < O.IO) proportion
of the tubal ring cases (10.9%) than electrocoagulation cases (4.7 %) received analgesic for
pain.
Complications /complaints after hospital
discharge
Rates of complications and complaints that
occurred after hospital discharge were similar
(p > O.IO) for the two technique (Table V). All
complications and complai nts resolved sponTable IV . Complications and complaints during
the recovery period by sterilization technique
performed
Complications/
complaints
Abdominal/pelvic pain
Not requiring treatment
Treated with analgesics Lumbar pain
Chest pain
Vomiting
Dizziness Spotting/bleeding
Electro- coagulation Tubal ring
(N = 150) (N = 147)
No. % No. %
22 14 .7 31 21.1
7 4.7 16 10.9
0 0.0 I 0.7
0 0.0 I 0.7
0 0.0 I 0.7
0 0.0 I 0.7
2 1.3 I 0.7
In/ J Gynnecol Obstet /4 
414 C. Aranda et q/.
Table V. Complications and complaints from
discharge to follow-up by sterilization technique
performed
Electrocoagulation Tubal ring
(N= 150) (N= 146)
Complications/
complaints No. % No . %
Abdominal/pelvic pain
Not requiring treatment 2 1.3 2 1.4
Treatment with analgesics 0 0.0 2 1.4
Spotting/bleeding 57 38 .0 52 35.6
Abdominal distension 0 0.0 I 0.7
Separation of trocar incision 0 0.0 2 1.4
Infected incision not
requiring antibiotic
treatment II 7.3 10 6.8
Urinary tract infection 2 1.3 2 1.4
Dysuria I 0.7 I 0.7
Fever treated with
antibiotics 2 1.3 3 2.1
taneously except for fever, which was treated
with antibiotics, and pain , whi ch wa treated
with analgesics.
Hospitalization
The duration of hospitalization was similar
(p > O.IO) for patients sterilized with either of the
two techniques. Overall, 92. 1% of the patients
were discharged from the hospital on the day of
the sterilizati on; 7.2% were discharged the following day. These figures do not include the six
patients who underwent additional unrelated
surgery and were hospitalized for one to three
days.
COMMENTS
The tubal ring procedure provides a safe
mechanical method of tubal occlusion. Although
higher rates of surgical difficulties were experienced with the tubal ring than with the electrocoagulation procedure, these difficulties were
minor, and were a result of difficulties in applying the rings and in being able to see the uterine
tubes. The problem of adequate visualization
may occur more frequently with the tubal ring
procedure because of the decreased field of
vision with the ring applicator (1). Increased
rates of surgical difficulties can be expected with
the tubal ring procedure for patients who have
edematous Fallopian tubes and tubes that are
/111 1 Gynaecol Obstet /4
fixed to other pelvic structures as a result of
adhesions. However, adequate visualization and
mobilization of the tubes are essential for both
procedures. For electrocoagul ation , the tubes
must be free of the bowel and other organs to
assure that only a segment of the Fallopian tube
is destroyed. For application of tubal rings, the
tubes must be easily manipulated so that a segment of the tube may be drawn into the laparoscope and the ring applied.
Perhaps the single most important advantage
of the tubal ring procedure is that inadvertant
burns to the patient's bowel , bladder, or peritoneum are eliminated. In this study one patient
underwent a laparotomy and repair of the small
intestine for a burn occurring during tubal electrocoagul ation .
All patients in this study will be followed up at
6 and 12 months after sterilization to evaluate
the long-term effects and failure rates of the electrocoagulation and tubal ring procedures. These
result will be reported in a subsequent communication. Until the results from this follow-up
study are known , it appears to be too early torecommend one procedure over the other. However, other investigators (3, 6) have reported
that the pregnancy rate associated with the tubal
ring technique is less than I% for women who
were followed up for up to 12 months.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This study was supported in part by the International Fertility Research Program (AID/csd-2979).
REFERENCES
I. Brenner, W. E., Edelman, D. A., Black, J. F. &
Goldsmith, A.: Laparoscopic sterilization with
electrocautery, spring-loaded clips, and silas tic
bands: technical problems and early complications. Fertil Steri127: 256, 1976.
2. Hulka, J. F., Fishburne, J. I., Mercer, J. P. &
Omran , K. F.: Laparoscopic sterilization with a
spring clip: a report of the first fifty cases. Am
J ObstetGynecoll/6: 715, 1973.
3. King, T. M. & Yoon, I. B.: The Falope ring
sterilization procedure. Presentation to the Conception Control Subcommittee of the Panel on Review of Obstetrical Gynecologic Devices, Washington, D.C., June 21, 1976.
4. Kwak, M. M. , Saha, A. & Pachauri, S.: Tubal
ring technique of laparoscopic sterilization. Second
International Congress of Gynecologic Endoscopy,
Las Vegas, Nevada, November 20-23, 1975. 
Electrocoagulation and tubal rings f~r tubal occlusion at laparoscopy 415
5. Madrigal, V., Wallman, J. A. & Goldsmith, A. :
Laparoscopic sterilization in a free-standing family
planning clinic: six-month follow-up. Adv Plann
Parent9: 23 , 1975.
6. McCann, M. F. & Edelman, D. A.: Late sequelae
of female sterilization. Paper presented at I st InterCongress, Asian Federation of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, Singapore, April 27-30, 1976.
7. Phillips, J., Keith, D., Hulka, J., Hulka, B. &
Keith, L. : Gynecologic laparoscopy in 1975 . J
Reprod Med 16: 105, 1976.
8. Yoon, I. B. & King, T. M. : A preliminary and
intermediate report on a new laparoscopic tubal
ring procedure. J Reprod Med 15: 54, 1975 .
Address for reprints:
Cecilio Aranda
Hospital Mexico
San Jose
Costa Rica
lnt J Gynaeco/ Obstet 14 