226 S.-A. MEDIESE TYDSKRIF 27 Februarie 1971
METHOD AND MATERIAL
Prospectil'e R(mdom-Sample Therapeutic Study
Because of these discrepancies, plus the fact that young
Natal Indian diabetics are frequently capable of good
control when treated with the sulphonylureas, it was
decided to embark upon a prospective random-sample
study to assess the relative efficacy of tolbutamide, cWorpropamide, insulin and dietary restriction alone, in the
management of the pregnant diabetic.
Known diabetics and patients with glycosuria and/ or
family and obstetrical histories suggestive of diabetes were
'screened' by means of a standard 100-g glucose-tolerance
test. Patients who were found to have a 'true' venous
blood glucose value of 140 mg/lOO ml or more 2 hours
after glucose administration, were admitted to hospital
where further investigations, including a full confirmatory
glucose-tolerance test, were performed.
Only those patients whose duration of pregnancy would
allow at least 6 consecutive weeks of treatment were
admitted to the therapeutic trial. The patients who qualified for the series had their treatment selected on a randomsample basis, with the exception of established diabetics
already on specific therapy. The 'treatments' available
were either tolbutamide (Rastinon-maximum dose 1·5 g
daily), cWorpropamide (Diabinese-maxirnum dose 250 mg
daily), insulin and dietary restriction alone. Patients who
failed to respond to a given form of therapy were treated
with an alternative method-usually insulin.
A total of 207 pregnant diabetics were treated in the
series. Of these 77 were Bantu (Zulu). The remainder
were all Natal Indian females of similar socio-economic
status, differing only in their religious affiliation. As indicated in Table II the patients were equally distributed as
regards' age and parity. In the final analysis, 58 patients
completed treatment on cWorpropamide, 46 received tolbutamide and 47 were treated with insulin for the greater
part of their pregnancy, while 56 were treated on dietary
restriction alone (Table ll). The over-all supervision,
SULPHONYLUREA THERAPY IN THE TREATMENT OF THE PREGNANT DIABETIC*
MORRIS NOlELOVITZ, M.B., B.CH., M.D. (RAND), M.R.C.O.G., Principal Obstetrician and Gynaecologist and Head
of the Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Addirzgron Hospital, Durban
250 mg of chloibropamide was given, and that one 20-
year-old patient was well controlled on chlorpropamide
during two pregnancies, both resulting in live births);
(iii) although it was suggested that chlorpropamide in a
dosage of 500 mg daily appears to be associated with a
high perinatal mortality rate, it is equally fair to conclude
that the patients requiring this excessive dose' were not
suitable for sulphonylurea treatment in the first place and
that the drug, in the correct dosage and in responsive
diabetics would be safe to use in pregnancy. This was
borne out by a comparison of the Durban and Cape Town
series (Table I). Thus, the perinatal mortality rate in the
sulphonylurea-treated Natal Indian (insulin-independent)
was approximately 37%, while the respective figure in the
Cape Town series (mostly insulin-dependent) was almost
double: 61 ·4~~.
Treatment of the Natal Indian diabetic with insulin has
proved to be unsatisfactory for three reasons: firstly, the
diabetic syndrome in this racial group is characterized by
a relative resistance to insulin;' secondly, the patients have
a natural reluctance to give their own injections which
makes them dependent upon friends and relatives and
often leads to irregular and inconsistent treatment; and
thirdly, even if they do respond to insulin, the dose required is usually excessive. The administration of a potentially dangerous drug by ill-qualified pers'ons leaves much
to be desired, particularly so in the pregnant diabetic,
where a sudden alteration in the environment of the
foetus could well be responsible for its intra-uterine or
perinatal demise.
In an attempt to achieve some form of outpatient control, widespread use of the oral antidiabetic agentsprimarily tolbutamide and cWorpropamide-was instituted.
This resulted in a reduction of the previously insuIindependent Natal Indian diabetics from 80% to 4% of the
total series in 1960.' Included in this category were pregnant
diabetics.
Reappraisal of a Previous Retrospective Study
In 1962 a retrospective study was published of 36
pregnant diabetics (most of them Natal Indians) who had
been on treatment with either tolbutamide or cWorpropamide.' The results of this study (Table I) indicated that,
whereas a control group of patients treated with insulin
and/ or diet had a perinatal mortality rate of 20%, the
foetal loss in the sulphonylurea-treated patients was 50%.
TABLE 1. RETROSPECTIVE ANALYSIS OF PERINATAL MORTALITY IN 40 PREGNANT DIABETICS TREATED WITH SULPHONYLUREAS'
Durban series Cape Town series Combined Live Perinatal Live Perinatal child death child death Live Dead
Chlorpropamide 8 9 0'5· 5 8·5 (37%) 14 (63%)
Tolbutamide 9 I 4·5· 13·5 (77%) 4 (23%)
Insulin I diet 8 2 40 10 48'0 (80%) 12 (20%)
*The 0·5 indicates a case where tolbutamide was followed by chlorpropamide.
On further analysis it was found that the 23 chlorpropamide-treated pregnant patients accounted for a perinatal
mortality of 63%. Treatment with tolbutamide was associated with a foetal10s., of 23%. There was only one severe
congenital abnormality following treatment with tolbutamide.
Reappraisal of this report, however, led to the conclusion
that it was deficient in many respects since: (i) it was a
retrospective study with the result that 'control' was difficult to assess in several patients, while some were known
to have been unsupervised for' long periods; (ii) patients
who did not respond to 250 mg of chlorpropamide were
treated with a dosage of 500 mg daily (it is siRnificant to
note that live babies were obtained in the 3 patients where
·Paper presented at the 6th \Vorld Congress of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, New York, April 1970.
27 February 1971 S.A. MEDICAL JOURNAL 227
TABU n. DISTRIBUTION OF TREATMENT: MEAN AGE A...ND PARITY
No. of Mean age Mean Treatment patients (years) parity Chlorpropamide 58 30'9 4·2 Tolbutamide 46 29'7 3'6 Insulin 47 31·8 4-8 Diet 56 32'7 4·2
general management and obstetrical treatment was identical in all other respects.
RESULTS
The efficacy of specific antidiabetic treatment during
pregnancy is best assessed according to two criteria, namely
the ability of a particular preparation to 'control' the
metabolic disturbance, and the perinatal mortality rate.
Control of the Diabetes
Diabetic 'control' may be judged by a variety of criteria
but for comparison in the present series 'good control' was
based on postprandial blood-sugar levels consistently below
150 mgj 100 mI; 'fair control' if the level was below 200
mgj 100 ml; and 'poor control' if values were above
200 mg/lOO m!.
Table III reflects the degree of control obtained. Thus,
80% of patients treated with chlorpropamide were classified as being 'well controlled', as compared with 82·5% of
TABLE Ill. COMPARATIVE RESULTS OF TREATMENT-DIABETIC
CONTROL*
addition of phenformin to achieve 'control'. One patient
was admitted in diabetic coma for which she received
insulin, but subsequently became stabilized on dietary
restriction alone.
Perinatal Mortality
The perinatal mortality is summarized in Table IV.
Patients treated by dietary restriction alone, for some unaccountable reason, yielded the best results as only 7 out
of the 56 pregnancies resulted in foetal loss due to stillbirth or neonatal death, a perinatal mortality rate of 12'5%.
The respective perinatal mortality rates for chlorpropamide,
tolbutamide and insulin were 13'7%, 15·2% and 17·02%.
TABLE IV. PERINATAL MORTALITY
Treatment Stillbirth Neonatal death Total
(No.) (No.) Of.
,0
Chlorpropamide 7 I 13-7
Tolbutamide 4 3 15·2
Insulin 3 5 17·02
Diet 4 :; 12·5
Unfortunately, the safety or efficacy of drug therapy
during pregnancy is frequently judged according to its
effect on the perinatal mortality and morbidity, without
adequate regard to the reason for its prescription or the
presence of other obstetrical complications. Further
analysis of the results in the present series (Table V) has
shown that of the 30 perinatal deaths, no fewer than
TABLE V. MAIN CAUSE OF PERINATAL MORTALITY
Good Fair Poor Obstetrical Poor diabetic Undeter-
<150 <200 >200 Treatment faCior cOlltrol mined
Treatment % % Of
,0 Chlorpropamide 5 1 2
Chlorpropamide 80'0 12·5 7·5 Tolbutamide 3 3 I
Tolbutamide 82·5 12·5 5'0 Insulin 5 2 1
Insulin 36'4 36'4 27·2 Diet 5 0 2
Diet alone 83-0 12·7 4·3 Total 18 6 6
·Postprandial blood·sugar level in mg/lOO m1.
patients on tolbutamide and only 36-4% of patients on
insulin. However, the latter group is 'loaded' with patients
who did not respond to other forms of therapy and were
subsequently treated with insulin for the greater part of
the pregnancy.
Although the patient's therapy was chosen on a randomsample basis, fewer patients were 'poorly controlled' on
dietary restriction alone (4'3%) when compared with
patients on specific therapy-7'5%, 5·0% and 27·2% for
chlorpropamide, tolbutamide and insulin respectively.
Secondary Failure
Patients were regarded as having failed to respond to
treatment if their postprandial blood-sugar values were
constantly above 200 mgj 100 mI; if they developed diabetic
ketoacidosis, or if they became symptomatic having been
asymptomatic previously.
According to these criteria 10'7% of the patients originally on treatment with chlorpropamide had their treatment revised as compared with 20·7% of patients treated
with tolbutamide, 11,1 % on dietary restriction alone and
10·6% on inSUlin. Patients in the last group required the
9
18 were associated with some major obstetrical abnormality such as severe pre-eclamptic toxaemia, prolapsed
placenta praevia, abruptio placenta, extreme prematurity,
and postmaturity. In one instance perinatal death resulted
following repeated attacks of maternal hyperpyrexia due
to a recurrent urinary tract infection.
Poor metabolic control-which is clearly not a failure of
drug therapy per se but due rather to poor patient selection
or inadequate therapy-had an adverse effect on the perinatal mortality and accounted for 6 perinatal deaths. A
major contributory factor could not be found in only 6
cases.
Congenital Abnormality
Only 2 of the infants born in the series had obvious
congenital abnormalities at birth. One was born with
choanal atresia, the mother having been on tolbutamide
during the first trimester, while the second baby had a
congenital heart lesion (Fallot's tetrad) which was incompatible with life. Treatment in the latter instance was
with insulin, which had been commenced when the patient
was 30 weeks pregnant.
It should be noted, however, that of the 104 patients
228 S.-A. MEDIESE TYDSKRIF 27 Februarie 1971
who completed the series on the oral hypoglycaemic agents,
only 26 fell pregnant while on treatment or started treatment during the first trimester.
Apgar Rating and Therapy
The various methods of therapy were compared to
assess the effect (if any) of treatment on the Apgar rating
at birth (Table VI). Although the numbers are small, the
TABLE VI. IMMEDIATE EFFEcr OF TIIERAPY ON APGAR RATING AT
BIRTH
Apgar score
8 -10 5-7 <5
Treatment 0'
,0 % %
Chlorpropamide 84·4 12·5 H
Tolbutamide 83-4 16·6 0·0
Insulin 71·0 6'4 22·6
Diet 94·0 3·0 3-0
results indicate that the oral hypoglycaemic drugs have
no significant effect on the infant at birth. The poor
results obtained with insulin were most probably due to
the fact that many of the patients were metabolically
unstable at the time of delivery due to poor diabetic
contro!.
Unfortunately, routine blood-sugar estimations of the
infants were not always obtained in the immediate postpartum period, and the incidence of neonatal hypoglycaemia could therefore not be accurately assessed.
Symptomatic hypoglycaemia, however, did not present as
a clinical problem and was not found to be any more
common in the infants of the sulphonylurea-treated as
compared with the insulin- or dietary-treated mothers.
DISCUSSION
The use of the sulphonylureas during pregnancy has had
limited support because of their alleged teratogenic effect
on the foetus, the inability to control the metabolic disturbance, and the adverse effect on perinatal survivaL3
.>
Diabetes, Sulphonylureas and Teratogenesis
The frequency of congenital malformation in the newborn of diabetic mothers varies between 2 and 5%, and is
therefore greater than the 0·7 - 1'7% incidence quoted for
the general population! More recently, Pederson et aL:
have confirmed that the frequency of foetal malformation
is approximately 3 times greater in diabetic than in nondiabetic controls. When the newborn of diabetics are
followed up for months or years the recognition of malformation increases and incidences of 9 - 12·5% have been
reported.·'· Therefore, although some authors'•·U
have
denied an increase in congenital malformation, there is
nevertheless sufficient evidence to associate disturbed
carbohydrate metabolism per se with a greater likelihood
of development of congenital abnormalities.
Teratogenic effects have also been observed under
experimental conditions with virtually all antidiabetic
medication in clinical use. As early as 1931, Lichtenstein
et al." noted multiple malformations in the offspring of
rats when insulin was used, while carbutamide given to
pregnant rats in doses of 200 mg daily, resulted in a
40 - 60% abortion and a 15'39% foetal abnormality rate.
Tolbutamide and chlorpropamide produced the same proportion of abortions but a much lower incidence of teratogenesis-between 2 and 4%.13
Species specificity, the large doses of antidiabetic drugs
administered and the impossibility of producing a diabetic
state in animals identical with that in humans, precludes
satisfactory conclusions which could be applicable to the
clinical usage of the drugs concerned. This is borne out in
a survey of the literature which has indicated that the use
of sulphonylureas during pregnancy is not associated with
a greater incidence of congenital abnormalities,"·lT and
that insulin may, in fact, be more teratogenic than the oral
antidiabetic drugs."
Only two of the patients in the present series delivered
abnormal infants: one following treatment with insulin
and the other with tolbutamide.
Since the sulphonylureas cross the placental barrier,
continued observation of the offspring in order to study
their pancreatic function and/or late emergence of congenital abnormality is necessary before one can categorically state that the sulphonylureas (as with any other
drug in pregnancy) are safe to use in pregnancy. However,
one should never lose sight of the fact when evaluating or
selecting treatment for the pregnant diabetic, that the
teratogenic agent is often the diabetic state itself.
Sulphonylureas and Diabetic Control
Dolger et al.'" treated 52 diabetic pregnancies with tolbutamide and achieved excellent control of the hyperglycaemia in the majority of patients. Although increased
dosages were required during the last few months of
gestation, only 4 patients needed insulin. Good diabetic
control was also achieved by Douglas and Richards'" in
their 34 chlorpropamide-treated pregnant diabetics.
Satisfactory control was obtained in over 80% of the
pregnant Natal Indian diabetics treated with either tolbutamide or chlorpropamide. A disturbing feature, however, was the relatively high incidence of 'secondary'
failure. Thus, 10-7% and 20'7% of the patients on chlorpropamide and tolbutamide respectively had to have their
treatment altered to achieve satisfactory control of the
diabetes. These results may have been influenced by the
failure of the patients to adhere to their diet or to take
their medication, while some were undoubtedly unsuitable
for oral therapy. None of the sulphonylurea failures could
be attributed to the development of 'late' side-effects.
When treating non-pregnant subjects who have failed to
respond to sulphonylurea therapy, the dose of the drug is
increased to the recommended maximum or substituted
with another sulphonylurea or combined with a diguanide.
However, these measures were not adopted in the present
series since the object was to assess the relative safety and
efficacy of tolbutamide and chlorpropamide when used
alone and in the usual dosage. It is felt that patients requiring a dose greater than the usual recommended amount
are not responsive to sulphonylureas and should not receive
oral hYIlOglycaemic therapy. It was failure to adhere to
this criterion which probably led to the poor results obtained previously by Jackson et al.'
In the present series, chlorpropamide was shown to be
27 February 1971 S.A. MEDICAL JOURNAL 229
more effective than tolbutamide during pregnancy, as 'good'
diabetic control was achieved as frequently, and fewer
patients needed to have this form of treatment withdrawn
because of failure to respond.
Retrospective analysis has indicated that the poor control
of patients on treatment with insulin might have been
improved if larger doses of insulin had been used. The
mean daily dose of insulin received by the patients in this
group was 92·9 ID (range 20 - 200 ID); in addition no
fewer than 62'1 % of the patients required more than 80
units of insulin per day to achieve metabolic control, Le.
twice that needed by a pancreatectomized individual. The
clinical observation of insulin resistance among these
patients has recently been confirmed in a preliminary
study of their insulin-secretory patterns.'" Thus it is reasonable to presume that many pregnant diabetics actually do
have sufficient insulin for their metabolic needs, but that
peripheral antagonism negates its efficacy.
Therefore, the widely accepted concept that pregnant
diabetics should always be treated with insulin' is unsound
and is reflected in the results obtained in our series. We
feel that the specific antidiabetic therapy of the pregnant
diabetic should be individually chosen. Excellent diabetic
'control' can frequently be achieved by dietary restriction
and bed rest alone; others will respond to the sulphonylureas-tolbutamide and chlorpropamide-provided that
the patients so treated have sufficient pancreatic reserve to
respond to this form of treatment and that correct dosage
schedules are used. Only those patients who fail to respond
to these methods or who develop ketoacidosis need to be
treated with insulin.
Sulphonylureas and Perinatal Mortality
The retrospective study published by Jackson et al. 3
indicated that whereas the sulphonylureas were not associated with the production of serious congenital abnormalities, chlorpropamide, in a dosage of 500 mg daily, appeared
to be associated with a high perinatal mortality (63%).
These results are contrary to those found in the literature,
for most authors have obtained satisfactory diabetic control and perinatal salvage rates when treating selected cases
with oral hypoglycaemics. A recent revieW" of the literature
showed that only 7·4 and 12·5% of diabetic patients receiving treatment with tolbutamide and chlorpropamide,
respectively, suffered a perinatal loss.
Analysis of our recent series has likewise confirmed the
impression that both the sulphonylureas-tolbutamide and
chlorpropamide-are safe to use during pregnancy and
that adequate diabetic control can be satisfactorily
achieved without affecting the perinatal salvage rate
adversely. Thus, over 80% of an unselected group of
pregnant diabetics were delivered of live infants having
been on treatment for all or the greater part of their pregnancies with either of the oral hypoglycaemic agents (Table
IV). Of equal importance is the observation that of the
15 perinatal deaths associated with sulphonylurea therapy,
no fewer than 8 were directly attributable to some obstetnc
factor, while 4 were due to poor metabolic control of the
diabetes- ...dearly not a fault of the drug treatment per se.
The Apgar rating of the children born to mothers on
sulphonylurea treatment was not significantly altered, thus
excluding the possibility of a 'harmful' action of .the
sulphonylurea manifesting in the early neonatal penod.
11
The reported occurrence of severe neonatal hypoglycaemia
in the infants of mothers treated with chlorpropamide,'·
was not a noticeable feature of this study. It must, however, be noted that blood-sugar estimations were only done
on those infa,nts exhibiting clinical evidence of Iiypo-.
glycaemia or some other abnormality. The only neonatal
death associated with chlorpropamide therapy was due to
the erroneous premature induction of labour at 35 weeks'
gestation, in an otherwise well-controlled 'uncomplicated'
diabetic.
SUMMARY
A study was undertaken to determine the safety and efficacy· of sulphonylurea therapy in the treatment of the pregnant diabetic. A total of 207 patients were treated, of whom 58:
completed treatment on chlorpropamide, 46 received tolbutamide and 47 received insulin, while 56 were treated on dietary· restriction alone. Analysis of the results showed that good metabolic control was achieved by the majority of patients on oral hypoglycaemic therapy and that these preparations. were not associated with an increased perinatal mortality or incidence of congenital abnormality. Poor metabolic control
and perinatal loss were found to be more closely related to.
the diabetes per se, and the presence of associated obstetrical
complications. The sulphonylureas are safe to use during preg-.
nancy provided that patients responsive to this form of treatment are chosen and that correct dosage schedules are em- ployed. The sulphonylureas are of particular value in patients.. who are illiterate or unreliable and in whom self-administered
insulin therapy may be otherwise dangerous.
I wish to thank Or H. R. J. Wannenberg, Medical Superin- tendent of King Edward VIII Hospital, for allowing access_
to the case records; Prof. 0_ Crichton and Or J. McKechnie
who participated in and helped to initiate the therapeutic trial;·
Mrs A. Ellis for technical assistance; and the members of theObstetric Unit at King Edward VIII Hospital for their help.
I should also like to thank Pfizer Laboratories Ltd for financial
support.
REFERENCES
l. Campbell, G. D. (1960): Brit. Med. J., 1, 537.
2. Idem (1963): S. Afr. Med. J., 37, 1195.
3. Jackson. W. P. U., Campbell, G. D., Notelovitz, M. and Blumsohn•. D. (1962): Diabetes, 11. suppl., 98.
4. Peel, J. in Stallworthy, J. A. and Bourne. G. L.. eds. (1966): Recent-- Advances in Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 11 th ed., p. 194. London:
J. & A. Churchill.
5. Moss, J. M. (1966): Sth. Med. J. (Bgham, Ala.), 59. 565.
6. Kyle, G. C. (1963): Ann. Intern. Med., 59, suppl. 3, 5I.
7. Pederson. L. M., Tygstrup, I. and Pederson, J. (1964): Lancet, I,.
1124.
8. White, P. (1960): Diabetes, 9, 345.
9. Paley, R. G. and Higgins. F. E. in Oberdisse, K. and Jahnke. K .• eds. (1959): Diabetes Mellitus: III Kongress der Int. Diabetes. Fed.• p. 575. Stuttgart: George Thieme.
10. Cardell, B. S. (1953): J. Ohstet. Gynaec. Brit. Emp., 60, 834.
11. OakJey, W. (1953): Brit. Med. J., 1, 1413.
12. Lichtenstein, H., Guest, G. M. and Warrant, J. (1931): Proc. Soc.
Exp. Bio!. (N.Y.), 78. 398.
13. Tuchman-Duplessis. H. and Mercier-Parat, L. (1959): J. Physiol.
Path. gen., 51, 65.
14. Stern, J. and Lavienville, M. (1963): Presse med., 71, 1547.
15. Douglas, C. P. and Richards, R. (1967): Diabetes, 16, 60.
16. Nusimovich, B.• Baldi, E. and Mir, P. (1964): Fifth Congress of the.
International Diabetes Federation, p. 89. Amsterdam: Excerpta Medica
Foundation.
17. Malins. J. M .. Cooke. A. M., Pyke, D. A. and Fittgerald, M. G.
(1964): Brit. Med. J., 2, 187.
18. Dolger, H., Brookman, J. J. and Nechemias, C. M. (1962): Diabetes,..
11, suppl., 97.
19. Notelovitz, M. and Vinik. A. I.: Unpublished data.
20. NolelovilZ M. (1968): 'TIle pregnant Natal Indian diabetic with.. chapte" ';n carbohydrate metabolism', M.D. thesis, University of the.
Witwatersrand. Johannesburg.
21. Farquhar, J. W. (1968): S. Afr. Med. J., 42, 237.