Health Technology Assessment 2009; Vol. 13: No. 56
DOI: 10.3310/hta13560
Health Technology Assessment
NIHR HTA programme
www.hta.ac.uk
Executive summary
A prospective randomised controlled trial
and economic modelling of antimicrobial
silver dressings versus non-adherent control
dressings for venous leg ulcers: the VULCAN
trial
JA Michaels,1
 WB Campbell,2
 BM King,3
J MacIntyre,2
 SJ Palfreyman,1* P Shackley1
and MD Stevenson4
1
Sheffield Vascular Institute, University of Sheffield, UK
2
Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, UK
3
Sheffield Primary Care Trust, UK
4
School of Health and Related Research (ScHARR), University of Sheffield, UK
*Corresponding author
Antimicrobial silver versus non-adherent dressings
for venous leg ulcers: the VULCAN trial
Executive summary
Executive summary: Antimicrobial silver versus non-adherent dressings for venous leg ulcers: the VULCAN trial
Background
Venous leg ulcers are a major health problem
and result in considerable costs and morbidity for
health services. Despite a lack of clinical evidence
of cost-effectiveness, the use of dressings containing
antimicrobials has become commonplace for
venous leg ulcers, with a particularly rapid rise in
the adoption of new silver-donating antimicrobial
dressings.
Objectives
The objective of this study was to examine the
effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of antimicrobial
silver-donating dressings for venous leg ulcers
compared with simple non-adherent (also known
as low-adherent) dressings, both used beneath
compression bandaging.
The aims were to:
• Collect cost and outcome data through a
randomised controlled clinical trial of silverdonating antimicrobial dressings versus nonantimicrobial low-adherent control dressings
applied to venous ulcers.
• Collect data from an observational arm of the
study regarding treatment, clinical outcomes
and costs of the management of venous leg
ulcers.
• Carry out an economic analysis alongside the
clinical trial to estimate the cost-effectiveness of
antimicrobial dressings for venous leg ulcers.
• Develop a cost-effectiveness model of venous
ulceration and to populate this with data from
the trial and published literature.
• Examine the cost-effectiveness of using
antimicrobial dressings in different
circumstances and with differing sets of
assumptions.
• Document current routine practice regarding
the use of antimicrobial agents in the treatment
of venous ulcers.
Methods
Design
The study was a pragmatic, prospective randomised
controlled trial (RCT) and cost-effectiveness
analysis of antimicrobial silver-donating dressings
versus low-adherent control dressings beneath
compression bandaging in the treatment of venous
leg ulcers.
Setting
This was a multicentre study that recruited patients
in primary and secondary care services in two
areas, in the north and south of England.
Participants
Participants were consenting patients with active
venous ulceration of the lower leg that had been
present for a period of greater than 6 weeks.
Interventions
Patients were randomised to receive either silverdonating dressings or low-adherent dressings
without any antimicrobial substances (control
dressings), applied beneath compression bandages
or hosiery. The choice of dressing within the two
groups was left to clinician preference. Evaluation
was by clinical assessment, supplemented by
evaluation of quality of life and cost-effectiveness.
Main outcome measures
The primary outcome measure was complete ulcer
healing at 12 weeks in the index limb. Secondary
measures were costs and resource use, qualityadjusted life-years (QALYs), cost-effectiveness, time
to healing, and recurrence rates at 6 months and 1
year.
Health Technology Assessment 2009; Vol. 13: No. 56 (Executive summary)
Results
Recruitment was slower than anticipated due
to encountering organisational, cultural and
bureaucratic obstacles. In total, 304 participants
were recruited to the clinical trial. A total of
213 were recruited to the RCT and 91 to the
observational arm. Within the RCT, 107 were
randomised to silver-donating antimicrobial
dressings and 106 to the control dressings. There
were no significant differences (p>0.05) between
the two groups for the primary outcome measure of
proportion of ulcers healed at 12 weeks (59.6% for
silver and 56.7% for control dressings). The overall
median time to healing was also not significantly
different between the two groups (p=0.408).
A total of 24 patients had recurrent ulcers within 1
year: the recurrence rates of 11.6% (n=11) for the
antimicrobial and 14.4% (n=13) for the control
dressings were not significantly different.
Mean utility valuations for both the EuroQol 5
dimensions (EQ-5D) and Short Form 6 dimensions
(SF-6D) showed no statistically significant
differences between the groups at 1, 3, 6 or 12
months. In comparison with the control group,
the antimicrobial group had an incremental cost
of £97.85 and an incremental QALY gain of
0.0002, giving an incremental cost-effectiveness
ratio for the antimicrobial dressings of £489,250.
Cost-effectiveness modelling of the results of the
RCT showed, for the base-case model, that only
included variables that were predictive of healing
antimicrobial dressings were not cost-effective.
Sensitivity analysis where dressing type was
forced (i.e used as a predictive variable regardless
of statistical significance) into the model, and
a small benefit in utility that was assumed to
occur at the point of healing, resulted in a small
average incremental benefit for the antimicrobial
dressings. However, this was not sufficient to
justify the additional cost and there remained a
high probability that the treatment was not costeffective.
Conclusions
The key finding of this study was that there
was no significant difference in either primary
or secondary end points between the use of
antimicrobial silver dressings and the control
group of low-adherent dressings. The cost analysis
showed a significantly higher cost for those treated
with antimicrobial dressings. Cost-effectiveness
modelling showed antimicrobial dressings to be
dominated by inert dressings, with there being no
difference in clinical outcomes and a higher cost
associated with the antimicrobial dressings.
Antimicrobial dressings have been widely adopted
without positive clinical evidence and our surveys
suggested that silver-donating antimicrobial
dressings have become widely used. If this reflects
national practice then the implication is that the
National Health Service (NHS) could be spending
several million pounds on dressings each year with
no evidence of clinical benefit.
Implications for health care
The results of this trial have the following
implications for health care:
• The evidence suggests that there are no
significant benefits in ulcer healing from
using silver antimicrobial dressings beneath
compression therapy.
• The use of less expensive low- or non-adherent
dressings is recommended in preference to
antimicrobial silver dressings.
• The results suggest that there is no indication
for the regular use of antimicrobial dressings
in general in promoting the healing of venous
ulcers.
• The finding of very widespread use of silverdonating dressings, shown by this trial not to
be cost-effective, should stimulate the NHS
to encourage and facilitate recruitment of
patients to large, well-designed studies of
new technologies before it disseminates in an
uncontrolled way.
• This trial has illustrated a number of the
bureaucratic, organisational and cultural
obstacles to research, which need to be
addressed centrally, for improved development
of cost-effective services in the long term. In
particular, effective mechanisms for engaging
frontline clinical staff with the NHS research
agenda are urgently required.
Recommendations for
future research
The following are recommendations are made:
• The development of a disease-specific quality
of life measure for venous ulcer patients that 
Executive summary: Antimicrobial silver versus non-adherent dressings for venous leg ulcers: the VULCAN trial
can be used in economic evaluation would be
an advantage for future studies.
• The differences in healing rates between
the two geographical areas of this study
have implications for future research. They
emphasise the need for very clear descriptions
of epidemiology, treatment methods and the
experience of staff engaged in compression
bandaging; and they suggest an advantage to
multicentre studies in different geographical
areas, to produce results which can reasonably
be generalised to the population as a whole.
• It is recommended that research into new
treatments for leg ulcers includes mathematical
modelling to establish the potential value
of further clinical trials, and to assist in
appropriate trial design prior to undertaking
large and expensive clinical trials.
• This study has not addressed the problems
of ulcers that fail to heal after 12 weeks of
compression, or the problem of patients
who are unable to tolerate compression. It
is uncertain whether antimicrobial dressings
might have any advantages in either of those
situations.
• Uncertainty also remains about the diagnosis of
‘infection’ in leg ulcers which might be relevant
to the use of antimicrobials. These are complex
areas for research, but more information would
be useful to guide clinical practice.
• Further studies are needed into how clinicians
make decisions regarding dressing type and, in
particular, the influence of sales representatives
as sources of evidence and guidance.
Trial registration
This trial is registered as ISRCTN72485131.
Publication
Michaels JA, Campbell WB, King BM, MacIntyre
J, Palfreyman SJ, Shackley P, et al. A prospective
randomised controlled trial and economic
modelling of antimicrobial silver dressings versus
non-adherent control dressings for venous leg
ulcers: the VULCAN trial. Health Technol Assess
2009;13(56).
Health Technology Assessment 2009; Vol. 13: No. 56 (Executive summary)
How to obtain copies of this and other HTA programme reports
An electronic version of this publication, in Adobe Acrobat format, is available for downloading free of
charge for personal use from the HTA website (www.hta.ac.uk). A fully searchable CD-ROM is also
available (see below).
Printed copies of HTA monographs cost £20 each (post and packing free in the UK) to both public and
private sector purchasers from our Despatch Agents.
Non-UK purchasers will have to pay a small fee for post and packing. For European countries the cost is
£2 per monograph and for the rest of the world £3 per monograph.
You can order HTA monographs from our Despatch Agents:
– fax (with credit card or official purchase order)
– post (with credit card or official purchase order or cheque)
– phone during office hours (credit card only).
Additionally the HTA website allows you either to pay securely by credit card or to print out your order
and then post or fax it.
Contact details are as follows:
HTA Despatch Email: orders@hta.ac.uk
Magellan Tel: 02392 492 000
Concept House, Bell Road Fax: 02392 478 555
Basingstoke, Hants RG24 8FB, UK Fax from outside the UK: +44 2392 478 555
NHS libraries can subscribe free of charge. Public libraries can subscribe at a very reduced cost of
£100 for each volume (normally comprising 30–40 titles). The commercial subscription rate is £300
per volume. Please see our website for details. Subscriptions can be purchased only for the current or
forthcoming volume.
Payment methods
Paying by cheque
If you pay by cheque, the cheque must be in pounds sterling, made payable to Direct Mail Works Ltd and
drawn on a bank with a UK address.
Paying by credit card
The following cards are accepted by phone, fax, post or via the website ordering pages: Delta, Eurocard,
Mastercard, Solo, Switch and Visa. We advise against sending credit card details in a plain email.
Paying by official purchase order
You can post or fax these, but they must be from public bodies (i.e. NHS or universities) within the UK.
We cannot at present accept purchase orders from commercial companies or from outside the UK.
How do I get a copy of HTA on CD?
Please use the form on the HTA website (www.hta.ac.uk/htacd.htm). Or contact Direct Mail Works (see
contact details above) by email, post, fax or phone. HTA on CD is currently free of charge worldwide.
The website also provides information about the HTA programme and lists the membership of the various
committees.
HTA
NIHR Health Technology Assessment programme
The Health Technology Assessment (HTA) programme, part of the National Institute for Health
Research (NIHR), was set up in 1993. It produces high-quality research information on the
effectiveness, costs and broader impact of health technologies for those who use, manage and provide care
in the NHS. ‘Health technologies’ are broadly defined as all interventions used to promote health, prevent
and treat disease, and improve rehabilitation and long-term care.
The research findings from the HTA programme directly influence decision-making bodies such as the
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) and the National Screening Committee
(NSC). HTA findings also help to improve the quality of clinical practice in the NHS indirectly in that they
form a key component of the ‘National Knowledge Service’.
The HTA programme is needs led in that it fills gaps in the evidence needed by the NHS. There are three
routes to the start of projects.
First is the commissioned route. Suggestions for research are actively sought from people working in the
NHS, from the public and consumer groups and from professional bodies such as royal colleges and NHS
trusts. These suggestions are carefully prioritised by panels of independent experts (including NHS service
users). The HTA programme then commissions the research by competitive tender.
Second, the HTA programme provides grants for clinical trials for researchers who identify research
questions. These are assessed for importance to patients and the NHS, and scientific rigour.
Third, through its Technology Assessment Report (TAR) call-off contract, the HTA programme
commissions bespoke reports, principally for NICE, but also for other policy-makers. TARs bring together
evidence on the value of specific technologies.
Some HTA research projects, including TARs, may take only months, others need several years. They
can cost from as little as £40,000 to over £1 million, and may involve synthesising existing evidence,
undertaking a trial, or other research collecting new data to answer a research problem.
The final reports from HTA projects are peer reviewed by a number of independent expert referees before
publication in the widely read journal series Health Technology Assessment.
Criteria for inclusion in the HTA journal series
Reports are published in the HTA journal series if (1) they have resulted from work for the HTA
programme, and (2) they are of a sufficiently high scientific quality as assessed by the referees and
editors.
Reviews in Health Technology Assessment are termed ‘systematic’ when the account of the search, appraisal
and synthesis methods (to minimise biases and random errors) would, in theory, permit the replication
of the review by others.
The research reported in this issue of the journal was commissioned by the HTA programme as project
number 02/10/02. The contractual start date was in July 2004. The draft report began editorial review in
August 2008 and was accepted for publication in April 2009. As the funder, by devising a commissioning
brief, the HTA programme specified the research question and study design. The authors have been
wholly responsible for all data collection, analysis and interpretation, and for writing up their work. The
HTA editors and publisher have tried to ensure the accuracy of the authors’ report and would like to thank
the referees for their constructive comments on the draft document. However, they do not accept liability
for damages or losses arising from material published in this report.
The views expressed in this publication are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the HTA
programme or the Department of Health.
Editor-in-Chief: Professor Tom Walley CBE
Series Editors: Dr Aileen Clarke, Professor Chris Hyde, Dr John Powell,
Dr Rob Riemsma and Professor Ken Stein
ISSN 1366-5278
© 2009 Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO
This monograph may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and may be included in professional journals provided
that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising.
Applications for commercial reproduction should be addressed to: NETSCC, Health Technology Assessment, Alpha House, University of
Southampton Science Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
Published by Prepress Projects Ltd, Perth, Scotland (www.prepress-projects.co.uk), on behalf of NETSCC, HTA.
Printed on acid-free paper in the UK by the Charlesworth Group.