Cliniial and Experimental Dermatology 1987; 12: 413^18.
Comparison of cadexomer iodine and dextranomer for
chronic venous ulcers
C.MOSS, A.E.M.TAYLOR AND S.SHUSTER University Department of Dermatology, Royal Victoria
Infirmary, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
Accepted for publication 2 June 1987
Summary
Forty-two patients with chronic resistant varicose ulcers
were observed for 6 weeks on standard out-patient
therapy, and then randomly allocated to daily treatment
with either cadexomer iodine (CI), a new topical agent, or
dextranomer for a further 6 weeks, at which time ulcers
judged clinically not to be responding could be changed
to the other treatment for the remaining 20 weeks of the
trial. There was no significant reduction in ulcer area
during the first 6 weeks on CI or dextranomer. A
significant preference for CI was shown by the optional
crossover. Retrospective analysis of ulcer size shows this
was not related to severity and preference was probably
due to bias towards the new treatment, the trial not being
blind. Neither therapy significantly reduced colonization
by /f-haemolytic Streptococcus, Staphylococcus aureus,
Pseudomonas or Proteus. The discrepancy between these
and previous findings with CI is largely due to different
methods of analysis rather than different results. We
conclude that, in chronic resistant venous ulcers, topical
therapy is of little importance compared with measures
which improve tissue oxygenation and repair.
Methods
Subjects and trial design
Fifty-six out-patients with unresponsive leg ulcers of
more than 3 months' duration were recruited. All were
judged to have venous insufficiency from a history of deep
vein thrombosis or signs such as swelling, dermatosclerosis, pigmentation and atrophie blanche. In some, ischaemia was also apparent from reduced foot pulses, coldness
and poor capillary return. After 6 weeks' observation on a
variety of standard treatments those still not improving
(n^42) were randomly allocated to treatment with either
dextranomer or CI. The two groups of 21 were comparable for age, sex, duration and size of ulcer, and
prevalence of arterial disease {Table 1). The plan was that
after 6 weeks' treatment with dextranomer or CI those
not improving could he changed to the other treatment
for the remaining 20 weeks of the trial (Fig. 1). Although
the trial was not blind because the treatments can easily
he distinguished by colour, the results of previous
ohjective measurements were not known during the
study.
Some chronic varicose ulcers persist despite therapy
aimed at reducing infection and oedema, and improving
venous return. Therefore, we welcomed a new topical
agent, cadexomer iodine (CI) ('lodosorh') a powder
composed of spherical starch beads, 100-315 /^m in
diameter, impregnated with iodine, said to improve ulcer
healing'-- by reducing debris and organisms in the ulcer.
To assess the importance of the anti-bacterial action of
CI, we compared its effect on the healing rate of ulcers
refractory to conventional out-patient therapy with that
of dextranomer ('Debrisan') a powder which is also said
to dehride ulcers, but without releasing iodine.
Correspondence: Dr Aileen E.M.Taylor, University Departmt:nt of
Dermatology, Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle upon Tvno NEl
4LP, UK.
Treatment
During the first 6 weeks ulcers were treated with topical
antiseptics such as hydrogen peroxide, potassium permanganate, silver nitrate or magenta paint. Subsequently, during the period of daily treatment with
dextranomer or CI, ulcers were cleaned with normal
saline before heing filled with the powder. The standard
dressing used throughout was a non-adhesive pad,
cotton-wool wadding, stockinette and a firm elastic
handage. If an ulcer developed clinical signs of acute
bacterial infection, such as redness, swelling or an
increase in pain or exudate, a 2-week course of oral
antibiotic was allowed.
Assessment
All assessments were performed by CM or AT, hut could
413
414 C.MOSS, A.E.M.TAYLOR AND S.SHUSTER
Table L Details of treatment groups
n
Male: female
Ischacmia present
Age* (years)
Weight* (kg)
Duration* (months)
Starting size* (cm')
Dextranomer
21
3:18
5/21(24%)
68+11
72+15
61+68
25-5+ 29-5
Cadexomer iodine
21
6:15
6/21(29%)
70 + 8
74+16
75 ±127
19-7+19-8
* Median ±SD.
No significant differences between the two groups.
sition' of bacteria from an ulcer were defined as change
from + -I- + to 0 and from 0 to + + +, respectively.
To see whether infection was related to ulcer healing,
regardless of topical therapy, changes in size of ulcers (a)
losing and (b) acquiring an organism over the first 6 weeks
of treatment were compared.
To study the effects of topical treatment on bacteriology, periods during and after treatment with oral
antibiotics were excluded, and the proportions of subjects
in the two groups losing and acquiring particular bacteria
within the first 6 weeks of treatment were compared by
Fisher's exact test. Bacterial grades before and after
treatment were compared using a paired t-test.
not be blind because, even after the dressings were
removed, differences in colour were still apparent. Ulcer
edges were traced on to polythene and later measured by
Tablet Digitizing System (Terminal Display Systems,
Blackburn, UK) which computes area and perimeter
simultaneously. Swabs for both aerobic and anaerobic
culture were taken. These measurements and clinical
assessment were performed at Weeks —6, 0, 2, 4, 6, 10,
14, 18, 22 and 26 (Fig. 1).
Analysis
Ulcer size. Ulcer areas and circumferences were not
normally distributed so non-parametric statistics were
used to study changes within treatment groups, and
differences between the groups at various times. The data
were normalized by calculating absolute and percentage
changes, and changes within and between groups were
studied using paired /-tests and two-sample f-tests,
respectively. Analyses were performed using area, circumferences, area: circumference ratios, and an estimated value for advancement of the ulcer edge' namely
(change in area x 2/(perimeter at Week 0 +perimeter at
week o).
Bacteriology. A swab was taken from any collection of
pus or debris, or from the most exudative area ofthe ulcer
bed. Growth of bacteria in culture was graded 0, +, + +
or + + -F using standard techniques. 'Loss' and 'acquiResults
Excluded patients and crossover data
Thirteen patients were withdrawn during the 6 week runin period: in seven the ulcer was improving, three were
admitted to hospital, two had other serious medical
problems, and one was unable to co-operate with daily
dressings. Of the remaining 43 randomly allocated to
treatment with CI or destranomer, one was excluded at
Week 4 because of poor compliance. The rest were
treated for at least 6 weeks.
At Week 6, two of one group of 21 patients were
changed from CI to dextranomer, and 11 of the other
group of 21 were changed from dextranomer to CI
because ofthe clinical impression that their progress was
unsatisfactory. This shows a significant preference for CI
{P<QQ\, Fisher's exact test). Planimetry results which
were not available at the time of crossover subsequently
showed that the clinical assessments were incorrect; 4/11
ulcers judged clinically not to have improved on dextranomer had actually become smaller, the mean change
over 6 weeks in the 11 ulcers being +2 2 cm' (SD + 90
cm"), while the two ulcers changed from CI to dextranomer had both increased in size, by 10-7 and HI cm-,
respectively.
During the subsequent 20 weeks, three ulcers healed,
one after 26 weeks on dextranomer, and two on CI after
10 and 18 weeks. Details of 13 other patients who stopped
treatment before Week 26 are shown in Table 2.
Recruitment Randomization
Optional
crossover
t t t t" t t t t t
- 6 10
Weeks of trial
18 22 26
Figure L Trial design. Patients had standard outpatient therapy G for 6 weeks followed by C^I • or
Dextranomer [E for up to 20 weeks. Clinical assessment, bacteriology, planimetry, and circumference
measurement were performed at times marked
with an arrow.
TREATMENT OF CHRONIC VENOUS ULCERS
Table 2. Patients who stopped treatment between Week.s 6 and 26
415
Treattnent
Proportion Weeks completed Reason for
Weeks 0-6 Weeks 6-26 dropping out on trial discontinuing
Dex
CI
Dex
CI
Dex
CI
CI
Dex
4/10(40%)
4/19(21%)
3/11(27%)
2/2(100%)
22
18
22
14
18
14
12
14
10
7
10
Trial interfering with
treatment of niueh larger.
non-trial uleer on same leg
Pain on application
Ulcer ovcrgranulated
Trial ulcer merged with
adjacent ulcer
Ulcer deteriorating
Pain on application
Ulcer deteriorating
1 iospitalized for other
reasons
Pain on application of C^I
Pain on application of both
Dex and C!
Hospitalized for other
Ulcer sizes
Paired /-tests showed no significant reduction in ulcer
si/c in either group, either during the 6-week run-iti
period, or during the first 6 weeks of treatment with
dextranomer or CI; there were no significant differences
in response, however expressed, between the two groups
after 2, 4 or 6 weeks' treatment. Results for area are shown
in Fig. 2. Non-parametric analysis using absolute sizes
and re-analysis after excluding ischaemic ulcers gave
similar results.
Analysis of the data from Week 6 to Week 26 is
complicated by the non-random crossover at Week 6 and
subsequent drop-outs. However, it is possible to compare
results for the 15 patients treated throughout, with CI
and the six patients treated throughout with dextranomer
and studied for the full 26 weeks (including those that
healed); bearing in mind the fact that poor responders
were excluded at or after Week 6, and the criteria for
excluding patients were different for the two groups.
Details of these subgroups are shown in Table 3. Over the
26-week period ulcers in both groups became smaller, but
the changes were not significant and there were no
significant differences between the two groups at any
time.
10
o -10
- 2 0
-6 0
Weekb of trial
2
Figure 2. Ulcer areas expressed as percentage of area at Week 0 in
suhjects treated for 6 weeks with CI (D) or Dextranomer (O) following
6 weeks of standard out-patient therapy.
Table 3. Details of subgroup treated with the same
therapy for 26 weeks
«
Male: female
Ischaemia present
Age* (years)
Weight* (kg)
Duration* (months)
Starting size* (cm')
Dextranomer
6
2:4
1/6 (17"J
64+15
72+18
18+15
12-3±H-f>
Cadexomer
15
4:11
4/15(27%)
70 + 8
73+14
W+145
15'5+|]-7
* median+ SD.
No significant differences hetween the two
groups.
416
10
S 0
o - 2
- 4
- 6
- 8
C.MOSS, A.EM.TAYLOR AND S.SHUSTER
(a) (b) g 40
Figure 3. C^hange in mean area of ulcers (a) acquiring and (b) losing /JIlaeniolytic Strep. (•), -V. aiireus (•), Pseudontonas (O) or Proteus (A)
during 6 weeks' treatment with CI or Dextranomer (data pooled).
Mean + SEM. * /*<0 05 (paired r-test). Number of ulcers in parentheses.
Antibiotics
Between weeks 0 and 6, three patients on dextranomer
and four on CI were given an antibiotic because of
deterioration in the trial ulcer. Two other patients on
dextranomer were given antibiotics because of infection
in another ulcer, and one patient on C^I developed a chest
infection which was treated with antibiotics during this
period.
Bacteriology
Results up to Week 6 only were analysed. Organisms
present in the leg ulcers at Week 0 are listed in Table 4.
Analyses were performed on the four commonest organisms, namely ^-haemolytic Streptococcus (/i-H. Strep.).,
Staphylococcus aureus {S. aureus), Pseudomonus and Proteus.
20
- 2 0
- 4 0
-60"-
;S. Haem.
Strep.
S. aureus Pseudomonas Proteus
Figure 4. Proportions of ulcers acquiring {ahove line) and losing
(below line) organisms during 6 weeks' treatment with Dextranomer
D or CI .•. Numbers of subjects in parentheses.
Table 4. Organisms present in ulcers at Week (I
Organism
/f-I laemolytie Streptococcus
(B,C,G)
Staphylococcus aureus
Pseudomonas
Proteus
Ktehstella
F.nterococci
Bacteroides
E. coli
Other eoliforms
Candida
Patients
affected at
Week 0 (%)
31-0
35-7
42-9
286
4-8
11-9
9-5
9-5
14-3
24
Complete disappearance of bacteria (change from
-|- -|- -|- to 0) during 6 weeks on either CI or dextranomer
was associated with a reduction in mean ulcer size,
whether calculated as absolute or percentage change, and
this was significant for Pseudomonas (paired /-test,
/*<005). Conversely, appearance of fi-W.Strep, or S.
aureus (change from 0 to -I- -I- + ) was associated with an
increase in mean ulcer area, but this was not significant
(Fig. 3).
Considering ulcers colonized (+ + + ) at Week 0, CI
appeared more effective than dextranomer against ^-H.
Strep., Pseudomonas and Proteus., and ineffective against
S. aureus, but the numbers were too small to show
significance. Considering those free of bacteria at Week 0,
/i-H. Strep, and S. aureus appeared (+ + + ) in ulcers
treated with either agent, but Pseudomonas and Proteus
only in ulcers treated with dextranomer (Fig. 4). Taking
TREATMENT OF CHRONIC VENOUS ULCERS 417
0"-
0 6 0 6 0 GO 6
,G. Haem, 5. aureus Pseudo- Proteus
Strep. monas
Week of trial
Figure 5. Change in hacteriology grade during 6 weeks' treatment
with Dextranomer (•) or CI (O). Mean + SF.M. *P<()()5 (paired /-
test).
all grades into account, the mean grade of infection with
Proteus reduced significantly (P<005, paired Mest)
during 6 weeks' treatment with CI, but not with
dextranomer {Fig. 5). However, using non-parametric
statistics (Wilcoxon signed-rank test) this change in grade
for Proteus was not significant. Grades of infection with
/i-H. Strep., S. aureus and Pseudomonas did not alter
significantly with either treatment (Fig. 5).
Discussion
We have failed to show any improvement in chronic leg
ulcers during 6 weeks' treatment with CI or dextranomer.
In contrast, other studies claim to show an effect of CI
within 6 weeks'-^ or 12 weeks'* on leg ulcers in outpatients, and within 3 weeks in decubitus ulcers^ and on
dextranomer on leg ulcers.**'
In other studies, considerable importance has been
attached to subjective improvements in pain, pus, exudate and erythema, but such data is of limited value unless
the study is blind. Because of its colour, both patients and
physicians can detect ulcers treated with CI. In the
studies by Ormiston and colleagues'"* a doctor 'not
otherwise associated with the conduct of the study'
assessed the ulcers, but would have known w hich was the
control group since those ulcers were treated with gentian
violet. Patients with an intractable condition, and their
medical attendants, are likely to be disillusioned with
standard therapies and hopeful for a new product. The
bias produced in this way was apparent in our study from
retrospective analysis of the areas of ulcers judged
subjectively to be deteriorating, which showed that we
conceded failure incorrectly more readily with dextranomer than with CI, the new product being tested. Thus,
the statistically significant preference for CI at crossover
shown by us and by Ormiston and colleagues'"* is a
measure of bias and does not mean that CI treatment is
objectively better. Ofthe two trials of dextranomer in leg
ulcers, that by Allen and Turmer" was a 'simple open
assessment' with no control group, and those by Jacobson
and colleagues'* and Groenewald' used subjective assessments of ulcer healing.
However, the previous studies also showed a greater
eifect of CI on ulcer area, which should not be subject to
bias, but may depend on how^ the data are expressed.
Although Skog and colleagues' demonstrated a significantly greater mean percentage reduction in ulcer area in
38 patients treated with CI for 6 weeks than in 36 patients
on standard therapy, ulcers in the CI group were smaller
(mean 20-1 cm', SEM —44) than in the control group
{mean 340 cm', SEM —5-7) and, therefore, a comparable
degree of absolute change will appear greater in the CI
group when expressed as a percentage change. Similarly,
in decubitus ulcers' the 30-9^\, reduction in area of ulcers
treated with CI for 3 weeks was significantly greater than
the 19-6% reduction in the control group, but if the
different initial sizes (9-6+ 1-8 cm' and 124 + 4 3 cm') are
taken into account, the absolute changes in ulcer area
were not significantly different. Indeed, depending on
initial size and degree of change, percentage change and
absolute change calculated from the same data can even
be in opposite directions, It is not clear what is the
biologically appropriate measure of ulcer healing, particularly of ulcers of different sizes. Until this has been
established, data should be analysed by absolute as well as
relative change in measurements of ulcer size {circumference and area) and only accepted if they agree. In this
respect, non-parametric tests using only direction rather
than degree of change in size are safer, although less
powerful, than parametric tests. Spurious differences can
also result from incorrect handling of data from patients
who do not complete the trial. If unresponsive subjects
are excluded, the results look better. Unsuitable patients
should be excluded before randomization, not after as in
the study by Moberg and colleagues.' In the present
study, the decision to allow oral antibiotics was made to
avoid patients dropping out because of deterioration.
Despite this, patients did drop out between Weeks 6 and
26, making results difficult to interpret after the first 6
weeks.
However, these pitfalls do not explain the difference
between our results and those of Ormiston and colleagues'"* who found healing rate {expressed as cmVweek
and cm^cm of circumference/week) significantly faster in
the Cl-treated group {/*<0001). In subsequent correspondence'''" it emerged that the difference between
treatments in terms of percentage reduction in area was
less impressive {/*< 002). Whether the Cl-treated ulcers
were actually smaller than those on standard therapy at
the end of 12 weeks was never stated. The most obvious
difference between these two trials is that ulcers healed
much more rapidly in Edgeware, regardless of therapy, a
418 C.MOSS, A.E.M.TAYLOR AND S.SHUSTER
third healing completely in 12 weeks compared with only
one out of 42 in Newcastle. This difference is less likely to
be due to our inferior bandaging technique, as imphed by
Ormiston and Fox,"* than to the fact that we deliberately
selected unresponsive ulcers: not only were patients
initially recruited on the basis of their unresponsiveness,
but those who showed signs of improvement during the
6-week run-in period were excluded, leaving only the
very worst. The ulcers treated by Ormiston and colleagues^ with CI and standard therapy were smaller
{12-1 + 13 and 10-2 + 8-7 cm', respectively) and of much
shorter duration {median 8-5 and 6 months, respectively)
both of which may be good prognostic features. It may be
that our ulcers were too unresponsive tor any difference
between treatment groups to emerge. Therefore, we
examined the possibility of a beneficial effect of CI in a
more responsive subgroup, namely those ulcers treated
with the same preparation for 26 weeks because they were
judged to be healing satisfactorily. Ulcers treated
throughout with either dextranomer or CI were already
smaller at 6 weeks and maintained an improvement to 26
weeks, but there was no significant difference between the
two treatment groups. The possibility remains that ulcers
which are healing well anyway will heal marginally faster
with CI.
Dextranomer was used for comparison so that any
additional effect of CI could be related to its bactericidal
action. However, the bacteriological data are difficult to
interpret. Firstly, the pathogenicity of bacteria found in
leg ulcers is uncertain and our finding that disappearance
of certain bacteria is associated with ulcer healing and
their appearance with increase in ulcer size does not
distinguish between pathogens and comensals. Nor was
there a clear temporal relationship to indicate whether the
changes in bacteriology were causal. Secondly, the
grading system for the growth of bacteria in culture has
not been validated for leg ulcers, where the method of
taking the swab may produce variation greater than the
difference between grades. Furthermore, the method of
analysis affects the findings: although the mean grade of
Proteus isolates reduced significantly during 6 weeks'
treatment with CI, the change was not significant using
non-parametric statistics which are more appropriate for
non-continuous data. The ineffectiveness of CI against S.
aureus in leg ulcers may be due to the presence of factors
in serum."
In conclusion, caution is required in interpreting the
results of studies on ulcer healing because apparent rate of
healing depends on ulcer size, particularly when
expressed as a percentage. CI is no better than dextranomer in treating chronic, resistant venous ulcers. The
resistance of these chronic ulcers to these and many other
therapies previously used on them suggests that topical
therapy is by itself of little importance, compared with
measures which improve tissue oxygenation and improve
tissue repair.
Acknowledgments
We thank our colleagues in Newcastle and Sunderland
for allowing us to study their patients, and Dr M.Flynn of
TIL (Medical) Ltd. for funding this study.
References
1. Ormiston MC^, Seymour MJT, Venn GF. et al. A randomised
comparison of cadexomer iodine and a standard treatment iti
outpatients with chronic venous ulcers. In: Fox J.'\, Fischer H,
cds. Cadexomer Iodine. Stuttgart, New York: FK Schattanerverlag, 1983: 63 69.
2. Skog K, Arnesjo B, Troeng T et al. .\ randomized trial comparing
cadexomer i{)dine and standard treatmetit in the outpatient
management of chronic venous ulers. British Journal of Dermatology 198.'?; 109:77-83.
3. Hopkins NFG, Jamieson CW. Antibiotic concentration in the
exudate of venous ulcers: the prediction ot ulcer healing rate.
British Journal of Surgery 1983; 70: 532- 534.
4. Ormiston MC, Seymour MJT, Venn GE, Cohen RI, Fox JA.
Controlled trial of Iodosorh in chronic venous ulcers. British
Medical Journal 19S5; 291: 308-310.
5. Moberg S, Hoffman I., Grennert M-l.c/ al. A randomized trial of
cadexomer iodine in decubitus ulcers. Journal ofthe Amcrnan
Ceriatrics Society 1983; 31: 4f)2 465.
6. Allen PC, Turmer Al). An evaluation of debrisan in chronic leg
ulcers and pressure sores. Journal of International .Medical
Research 1979; 7: 459-162.
7. Groenewald JH. An evaluation of dextranomer as a cleansing
agent in the treatment of the post-phlehitic stasis ulcer. South
African Medical Journal 1980; 37: 809 815.
8. Jacobsson S, Rothman L, Arturson G, Gaurot K, Halgar K,
Juhlin I. A new principle for the cleansing of infected wounds.
Scandinavian Journal of Plastic and Reconstructive Surfrery 1976;
10: 65-72.
9. Moss Celia, Taylor Aileen F.M, Shuster S. Controlled trial of
Iodosorb in chronic venous ulcers (letter). British Medical Journal
1985; 291: 902.
H). Ormiston MC, Fox JA, Controlled trial of Iodosorh (letter),
British Medical Journal 1985; 291: 1424-1425.
11. HugoWB, \"ewton JM. The antibacterial activit) of a complex of
iodine and a non-ionic surface-active agent. Journal of Pharmacy
and Pharmacoloi!,y 1964; 16: 189-197.
