325
Improvement of Microcirculation and
Healing of Venous Hypertension and Ulcers
with Crystacide. Evaluation of Free Radicals,
Laser Doppler Flux and PO2. A ProspectiveRandomized-Controlled Study
G. Belcaro, MD, PhD, M. R. Cesarone, MD, A. N. Nicolaides, MD, MS,
G. Geroulakos, MD, PhD, A. Di Renzo, MD, M. Milani, MD, A. Ricci, MD,
R. Brandolini, MD, M. Dugall, MD, I. Ruffini, MD, U. Cornelli, MD,
and M. Griffin, London, UK
In 20 patients with chronic venous insufficiency and venous hypertension associated with
ulcerations, the effects of a new compound, applied onto the skin (Crystacide) were assessed
in a randomized, controlled study. Duplex scanning was used to assess the presence of venous
obstruction and incompetence, and microcirculatory methods were used to assess and
quantify venous microangiopathy and to follow up subjects after local treatment with
Crystacide. Laser Doppler flowmetry (LDF) was used to assess skin perfusion in association
with transcutaneous (tc) partial pressure of oxygen (PO 2) measurements. Local plasma free
radicals (PFR) were evaluated in the area surrounding the venous ulcer, with the D-Rom test.
Crystacide was applied around and on the ulcer for 10 days. Crystacide was more effective
than the control treatment: PO2 was increased, PFR and LDF were decreased (flux increase is
associated with venous hypertension), and the ulcer area was significantly smaller at 10 days
in the Crystacide group in comparison with the placebo group (p < 0.05). In conclusion, in venous
ulcerations, local treatment with Crystacide (10 days) improves the microcirculation and
decreases skin free radicals improving healing.
Introduction
Venous ulcers constitute a significant problem,
particularly in the aging population. Resistance
to treatment causes difficult healing problems
and increased costs in the health systems. 1,2
Treatment of venous ulcerations includes several
aspects 1-4 such as treatment of varicose veins and
venous reflux with surgery and/or sclerotherapy,
reduction of venous hypertension (ie, the component due to obstruction), antibiotic treatment,
skin transplant to improve healing, local debridement, elastic compression, and disinfection of the
Angiology 54:325-330, 2003
From the Irvine2 Vascular Laboratory and Physiology,
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Chieti University, San
Valentino Vascular Screening Project, Vascular Unit, St. Mary’s
Hospital at Imperial College, and Ealing Hospital, London, UK
There are no conflicts of interest. Dr. M. Milani is the Medical
Director of Mipharm; he reviewed the technical aspects of the
paper. The study was organized as an independent study
Correspondence: Gianni Belcaro, MD, Via Vespucci 65,
65100, Pescara, Italy
&copy;2003 Westminster Publications, Inc., 708 Glen Cove Avenue,
Glen Head, NY 11545, USA
Downloaded from ang.sagepub.com at RUTGERS UNIV on August 10, 2015
326
ulcerated area. The use of local disinfectants may
also cause several problems and impair healing.
The local application of disinfectants and other
products may destroy granulation tissue and cells
promoting healing and make skin and scarring
tissue sensitive and reactive. 3,4 Therefore local application of healing products should consider
local allergy problems and their action on the
healing.
Venous ulcers and healing problems are usually associated with microcirculation alterations 1,4
and with a higher level of free radicals in the local
tissue 5-12 and circulation.
The aim of this study was the short-term (10
days) evaluation of effects on the microcirculation and on free radicals of the local application a
hydrogen peroxide cream (Crystacide, Mipharm,
Milan, Italy) .13 Also the effects of Crystacide in
the healing process of the venous ulcers were
evaluated in a randomized, controlled study.
Patients and Methods
Criteria for Inclusion
Patients (inclusion age 55-70) with venous ulcerations, without arterial disease (ankle-brachial
index > 1.1) or diabetes, obesity, or other systemic disease requiring medical/drug treatment
were included after informed consent.
Ulcers larger than 2 cm and less than 5 cm in
their minimum and maximum diameters were included. All ulcers were at the internal perimalleolar region and were caused by severe, chronic, venous hypertension. Before inclusion into the
10-day Crystacide protocol, ulcers had been
cleaned and patients had been administered
broad-spectrum oral antibiotic treatment for a period varying between 15 and 20 days, until local
or systemic signs of infections had improved.
Venous hypertension was the most significant cause of the included ulcerations 1-4 as determined by noninvasive tests (color duplex scanning, and AVP (ambulatory venous pressure
measurements). In all limbs venous hypertension was associated with moderate to severe venous
obstruction following documented post-thrombotic syndrome4 with increased ambulatory venous pressure. 3,4
Venous hypertension, mainly due to reflux, was moderate or mild at the moment of inclusion
and all patients were scheduled for surgery/sclerotherapy after closure of the ulceration (within 2
months after the 10-day treatment trial). No surgical or other invasive method was used during
the trial.
Elastic compression was used during the trial
with below-knee (Sigvaris, Ganzoni) stockings;
the compression at the ankle varied between 25
and 30 mm Hg. The stockings were removed
every morning and reapplied after the ulcer was
cleaned and after medication was applied. Stockings were also used at night.
Cream Application
After the lower limb 13,14 and the area of ulceration
was cleaned with water and neutral soap (immersion of the limb and bath in water at 40° for 15
minutes) the skin was dried with tissue paper and
2 g of Crystacide cream was applied around the
ulcerated area with a 2-finger, gentle massage.
The cream was also applied in a thin film
onto the ulcerated surface without massaging.
The area was then covered with tissue paper and
Tensoplast elastic, adhesive bandage (without
surrounding the whole circumference of the
limb). Stockings (20-25 mm Hg compression at
the ankle) were then applied. The cream was applied by a physician on days 1 and 5 and by the
patients after careful briefing. Patients unable to
follow instructions were excluded. Patients were
instructed to report any problem and any potential reaction or side effect.
The same management plan was used for the
control group. A &dquo;placebo cream,&dquo; comparable in
aspect and density, to Crystacide was used. The
creams were given to patients in containers without labels.
Crystacide Action
This formulation releases low concentrations of
H2o2, which are bactericidal. In comparison with
standard aqueous H202 the action is very slow
and the solution is not irritating or toxic for granulating tissue. 15 The H202 in Crystacide is encapsulated in crystal lipids from which it is slowly released by the contact with skin/tissue, which increases the temperature of the lipid component.
An increase in local prostacyclin, in VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factors) with increased
neoangiogenesis and local release of 02 have been
shown in controlled animal studies. 15 Also the
compound is active on the microcirculation, improving the level of microangiopathy, as shown
in a recent clinical study.l6
Downloaded from ang.sagepub.com at RUTGERS UNIV on August 10, 2015
327
The microcirculation was assessed as previously described with a Vasamedics (St. Paul, MN,
USA) laser Doppler flowmeter and a Kontron Po2-
Pco2 transcutaneous analyzer.1-4
Plasma free radicals (PFR) were measured
with a new original method (D-ROM test;
Diacron, Grosseto, Italy). The method, its application in vascular disease, and the meaning of
PFR in subjects with vascular diseases have been
described by our group in previous publications. -1,6 A drop of blood was obtained from intact
skin surrounding the ulcer (1-3 cm proximally to
the ulcer border) in areas without infections. An
increased level of PFR has been associated with
increased level of cardiovascular disease,1,2 and
several possible antioxidant treatments have been
proposed. Plasma free radicals (PFRs) can now
be noninvasively assessed in vivo with a new,
noninvasive test (D-Roms) method based on the
spectrophotometric analysis of minute quantities
of blood.2 Calibration and average values in normal and vascular patients have been reported by our group.2 Attention to PFRs and their evaluation has recently focused on the evolution of cardiovascular disease and on the role of PFRs in
causing or increasing the rate of progression of
cardiovascular disorders. However, increase of
PFRs may also be a consequence of vascular prob- lems.1-4 Destructive methods are precise but cannot be easily used in subjects to evaluate the effect of treatments.’ PFRs were measured with a
single drop of blood taken from a finger and from
a peripheral vein in limbs most affected by chronic vascular insufficiency (CVI) to evaluate possible
differences between the systemic and peripheral
blood content of PFRs. The D-Roms method has
been previously described in detail by our group
and calibrated in our population.6 In venous hypertension and microangiopathy PFRs are increased systemically and at local levels (areas of
venous hypertension and microangiopathy).
Plan of the Study
Patients were seen for the preliminary evaluation
and preselection within 5-10 days before treatment inclusion. Microcirculatory parameters were
measured at days 0 and 10 and patients were
seen and rebriefed after 5 days. PFRs were also
measured at day 5. The area of ulceration was
recorded on a transparent, plastic foil. A computerized (Apple McIntosh, Graphic Calculator and
a Wacom graphic tablet, 2002) were used to evaluate the integral of the ulcerated area and to obtain the percent decrease variation in time.
Statistics
Nonparametric tests were used to evaluate microcirculatory parameters (Mann-Whitney Utest), which have an irregular distribution. 1
Results
Table I shows details of the 2 groups of 10 subjects (A: controls; B: active treatment with
Crystacide). The 2 groups were comparable for
age and sex distribution, ambulatory venous pressure, and ulcer presence). No significant variations in PFR, LDF, Po2, and area of ulceration
were observed in 10 days in the control group
(Table I). However, the decrease in PFR and LDF,
the increase in Po2, and the decrease in PFR in
Table I. Details of the included patients.
*Presence of ulcerations.
Downloaded from ang.sagepub.com at RUTGERS UNIV on August 10, 2015
328
the areas of ulcerations were significant in the
Crystacide group.
Plasma free radicals and laser Doppler flux,
comparable at inclusion, were significantly decreased in the active treatment group at 5 and 10
days (Table II). The difference was statistically
significant in favor of Crystacide. Also, P02 was
significantly increased in the Crystacide group
(p < 0.05 in comparison with controls).
Ulceration areas were evaluated at inclusion
and after 10 days. The areas of ulcerations were
comparable in both groups at inclusion. However,
after only 10 days, a median decrease in the ulcerated area of 35% (range 12-44%) had been
observed in the Crystacide group while in the
control group the decrease had been in the range
of 0 to 23.5% (median 11%) (p < 0.05).
Figure 1 shows the variation in PFR; Figure 2
shows the decrease in laser Doppler flux (which is
increased in venous hypertensive microangiopathy and tends to increase further with local inflammation and infections). A skin flux decrease
was observed in all subjects treated with
Crystacide. A decrease toward normal, lower values is a very positive finding in subjects with venous ulcerations and it is generally associated
with improved healing rate.
Figure 3 show the significant increase in transcutaneous partial pressure of oxygen (Po2),
which also indicates, generally, a better skin perfusion and is usually associated with improved
healing. These significant, positive variations
were also observed in all Crystacide-treated subjects.
Figure 4 shows the significant variation in the
area of ulceration (the reduction was significantly larger in the treatment group).
No side effects were observed in the 10 days
of treatment or in the month following inclusion.
Conclusions
Significant results with Crystacide were visible
after only 10 days of local treatment: the decrease
in plasma free radicals measured at local levels at
Table II. Variations in study parameters in the 2 groups (mean and 1 SD).
*p < 0.05; ~ p < 0.005 (Mann-Whitney U-Test).
Downloaded from ang.sagepub.com at RUTGERS UNIV on August 10, 2015
329
Figure 1. A decrease in local
venous blood free radicals. The
decrease in free radicals was observed
in all subjects treated with Crystacide.
The median decrease in PFR at 10 days was 18.67%.
Figure 2. Decrease in laser Doppler
flux. Flux is usually increased in venous
hypertensive microangiopathy and tends
to increase further with local
inflammation and infections. A decrease
toward normal, lower values is a very
positive finding in subjects with venous
ulcerations and is associated with
improved healing rate of ulcerations.
These positive variations in flux were
observed in all treated subjects.
Figure 3. A significant increase in
transcutaneous P02 indicates, generally, a
better skin perfusion and is usually associated
with improved healing. These significant,
positive variations were observed in all treated
subjects.
Figure 4. The significant variation in the
area of ulceration (the reduction was
significantly larger in the Crystacide group).
the region of the ulceration, the decrease in the
abnormally high skin flux, the improvement in
skin perfusion observed by measuring the increase in Po2, and finally, the fast decrease in
ulcer size were visible in both groups. The effects
due to compression are clear, for, in venous hyDownloaded from ang.sagepub.com at RUTGERS UNIV on August 10, 2015
330
pertensive microangiopathy, compression is very
effective in reducing micropooling at the capillary
level and also decreasing capillary filtration and
therefore limiting the occurrence and extent of
edema. The effects of the active treatment with
Crystacide were associated with significant improvement, in comparison with placebo, in the
healing rate and in a faster closure of the ulcers.
It is possible to show in a regression line that the
decrease of the area of ulceration and skin flux
decrease are correlated (r = 0.69; p < 0.05). The
observation that the decrease in local PFRs and
the decrease in ulcer area have a very good correlation indicates an important role of Crystacide
and possible action of this product in reducing
free radicals and therefore making venous ulcer
healing significantly faster.
Improvements in microcirculatory parameters are usually associated with an improved and
faster healing (with a more important, significant
decrease in ulcerated area), as observed in the
Crystacide group. The release of oxygen in the tissue could be responsible both for decreasing inflammatory responses, by limiting white cells migration and adhesion, and for controlling the proliferation of bacterial components, which usually
contribute to complicating ulcer healing in venous hypertension.
Microcirculatory methods have been used and
validated in several experimental and clinical
studies.I-4 In this study the techniques were used
in strictly controlled environmental conditions,
and results were consistent with the clinical problem and comparable to data from previous studies
and experiments produced by our group. Results
are also comparable to results obtained by other
clinical studies and investigators. 1-6
In conclusion the present study indicates that
Crystacide, acting on local free radicals, improved
the microcirculation and promote ulcer healing.
This was obtained even during/after a short-term,
10-day treatment, and the effects of Crystacide on local free radicals were clearly visible after
only 5 days of local treatment.
Previous studies 13,14-16 have indicated that
peroxide improves epidermal would healing and
is very useful for healing ischemic ulcerations.
The tolerability of Crystacide is very good and
the treatment is easy and obtained at a limited
cost. More prolonged studies, with larger samples, possibly including subjects with other types
of microangiopathy (ie, diabetic, ischemic foot ) are needed to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of
this treatment in the healing of chronic vascular
ulcerations.
REFERENCES
1. Belcaro G, Bollinger A, Hoffman U, et al (eds): Laser
Doppler. London: Med-Orion, 1996.
2. Belcaro G, Nicolaides AN, Stansby G: The Venous
Clinic. London: Imperial College Press, 1999.
3. Belcaro G, Nicolaides AN: Noninvasive Investigations
in Vascular Disease. London: Imperial College Press,
2000.
4. Belcaro G, Nicolaides AN, Veller M: Venous Disorders. A Manual Of Diagnosis and Treatment.
Cambridge: Saunders, 1995.
5. Cesarone MR, Belcaro G, Carratelli M, et al: A simple test to monitor oxidative stress. Int Angiol 18 :127-
130, 1999.
6. Hennekens CH: Antioxidant vitamins and cardiovascular disease: Current knowledge and future directions. Nutrition 14:50-51, 1998.
7. Christensen OB, Anehus S: Hydrogen peroxide cream: An alternative to topical antibiotics in the
treatment of impetigo contagiosa. Acta Dermatol
Venereol 74:460-462, 1994.
8. Kardinaal AFM: Antioxidants in adipose tissue and
risk of myocardial infarction. The EURAM Study. Lancet 342:1379-1384, 1993.
9. Janzen EG: Spin trapping and associated vocabulary.
Free Radical Res Commun 10:63-68, 1990.
10. Cesarone MR, Incandela L, Belcaro G, et al: Variation
in plasma free-radicals in patients with venous hypertension with HR&mdash;Venoruton. A clinical, prospective, placebo-controlled, randomised trial. J
Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther Suppl 1:S25-28, 2002.
11. Incandela L, Belcaro G, Cesarone MR, et al: Oxygen
free-radicals decrease in hypertensive patients treated with lercanidipine. Int Angiol 20:136-140, 2001.
12. Haliwell B: Free radicals, antioxidants and human
disease: Curiosity, cause or consequence. Lancet
344:721-724, 1994.
13. Alvarez OM, Mertz PM, Eaglestein WH: Benzoyl peroxide and epidermal wound healing. Acta Dermatol
119:222-225, 1983.
14. Tur ET, Bolton L, Constantine BE: Tratamento de la
ulcera iscquemica con peroxido de hidrogeno en
crema en el cerdo de guinea: Aumento de la perfusion vascular en diferentes zonas cutaneas. J Am
Acad Dermatol 33:217-221, 1995.
15. Crystacide Investigator’s Brochure, Mipharm, Milan,
Italy, 2003.
16. Belcaro G, Cesarone MR, Nicolaides AN, et al:
Crystacide nel trattamento delle ulcere venose; effetti sul microcircolo. Dermoline 2(suppl):11-13, 2002.
Downloaded from ang.sagepub.com at RUTGERS UNIV on August 10, 2015