A272 VALUE IN HEALTH 17 (2014) A1-A295
HCV treatment is associated with significant health care resource utilization. A high
proportion of patients experienced AE for which management was associated with
substantial additional costs, especially the anemia treatment. Thus, the cost of AE
should be considered in future treatment options.
PIN42
Direct Cost Of Hepatitis C From The Perspective Of The Health Care
System For The Federal Government Employees In Mexico
Morales S.
1, García X.
2, Hernandez M.E.
3, Jauregui M.
2, Jimenez L.
4, Reyes-Lopez A.
5
1ISSSTE, MEXICO, Mexico, 2ISSSTE, mexico, Mexico, 3ISSSTE, Mexico, Mexico, 4MSD, México,
Mexico, 5Mexican Children Hospital, Mexico City, Mexico
Objectives: Estimate the direct cost of hepatitis C in Mexico, from the perspective
of the health care system for the government employees, and simulate the economic
impact of new antivirals. Methods: We reviewed one hundred clinical records of
patients diagnosed with chronic hepatitis C, to know the pattern of resources use at
two hospitals of the health care system for the government employees, taking into
account the disease stages based on the Child-Pugh. The inclusion criterion was
patients with chronic HVC unresponsive to treatment or without the double viral
therapy. Unit prices and costs of medical inputs were obtained from official sources.
Demographic and clinical variables were also recorded in order to do comparisons. Statistical analysis of data was made with the SPSS. Simulation of economic
impact of treatment with antivirals was done based on natural history of disease
over a ten years horizon. Results: Annual mean costs of disease progression and
complications were higher for Child-Pugh C (US$8,739) than B (US$6,319) and A
(US$2,430). The estimated cost of one patient in Child-Pugh A stage not responding
to peginterferon and ribavirin resulted in US$62,506 taking into account that this
patient progress until Child-Pugh C. If the not responding patient could be treated
with peginterferon, ribavirin and boceprevir the cost would be US$43,633, while a
naive patient would cost US$34,302. Conclusions: Hepatitis C imposes a high
economic burden to the health care system for the government employees. The
access of this population of patients to new antivirals would result in savings for
the institution as well as increasing health benefits for patients.
PIN43
A Cost-Effectiveness Analysis Of Pre-Exposure Prophylaxis (PREP) For
The Prevention Of Hiv In The Los Angeles County Msm Population
Drabo E.
1, Hay J.W.
1, Vardavas R.
2, Wagner Z.
1, Sood N.
1
1University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 2Rand Corporation, Santa Monica, CA,
USA
Objectives: To assess the potential trade-offs between aggressive screening (“testing”) of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), early initiation of treatment
(“test-and-treat”) with antiretroviral therapy (ART), and pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) among men who have sex with men (MSM) in Los Angeles County
(LAC). Methods: A compartmental mathematical model is developed to simulate
HIV incidence among 15-65 year old MSMs of LAC over a twenty-year period, and
estimate the cost and effectiveness of various HIV interventions using a societal
perspective and a lifetime horizon. Annual LAC MSM population data (2000-2010)
are estimated from the LAC HIV Surveillance Reports and the RAND California
Population and Demographics database. The model input parameter values are
derived from the published clinical literature and the Federal Supply and IMS Fee
Schedules. For each intervention, we estimate the number of new HIV infections
averted, the discounted costs and quality-adjusted life years (QALYs), and the incremental cost per infection averted and cost-effectiveness ratios. Bootstrapping and
probabilistic sensitivity analyses are conducted to assess the robustness of the
estimates. Results: Our preliminary results show that relative to the status quo
policy, and at the current US willingness to pay threshold of $100,000/QALY saved,
both the PrEP, “testing” and “test-and-treat” strategies are cost-effective ($86,194;
$44,746 and $94,520 per QALY saved, respectively). These results are imputable to
the preventive and survival benefits of PrEP, knowledge of infection status, and early
treatment. The relative effectiveness of PrEP is sensitive to PrEP and ART adherence
and coverage rates. All cost-effectiveness profiles improve with ART price reductions
following patent expiration. Conclusions: PrEP, “testing” and “test-and-treat”
offer cost-effective alternatives to the status-quo policy. The success of the PrEP
and “test-and-treat” strategies remains particularly contingent on the uptake rate
and adherence to treatment. The lack of evidence on adherence behaviors towards
PrEP thus warrants further studies that mimic real-world adherence patterns.
PIN44
Cost-Effectiveness Of Small Intestinal Submucosa Extracellular
Matrix On Wound Closure In Patients With Difficult-To-Heal Wound
Of Mixed Arterial/Venous And Venous Etiology
Gilligan A.M., Waycaster C.
Smith & Nephew Biotherapeutics, Fort Worth, TX, USA
Objectives: Determine the cost-effectiveness of small intestinal submucosa extracellular matrix (SISEM) relative to standard of care (SC) on wound closure for the
treatment of mixed arterial/venous (A/V) or venous (VLUs) leg ulcers. Methods:
A 2-stage Markov model was used to predict the expected costs and outcomes of
wound closure for SISEM and SC. Outcome data used in the analysis were taken
from an 8-week randomized clinical trial that directly compared SISEM and SC.
Patients were followed for 6 months to assess wound closure. Forty-eight patients
completed the study; 25 for SISEM and 23 for SC. SC was defined as a standard moist
wound dressing. Transition probabilities for the Markov states were estimated from
the clinical trial. The economic outcome of interest was direct cost per ulcer-free
week. Resource utilization was based on the treatment regimen used in the clinical trial. Costs were derived from standard cost references. The payer’s perspective
was taken. Results: SISEM-treated wounds healed, on average, after 5.4 weeks of
treatment, compared to 8.3 weeks for SC wounds (p=0.02). Furthermore, complete
wound closure was significantly higher for patients treated with SISEM (p<0.05),
with 20 wounds closed in the SISEM group (80%) and 15 wounds closed in the SC
PIN39
Recent Trends In Costs, Length Of Stay, And Mortality Associated
With Infant Pertussis Hospitalizations In The United States
Davis K.L., Kurosky S.
RTI Health Solutions, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA
Objectives: Pertussis incidence has resurged in the US after a nadir in the 1970s
and is now one of the most prevalent vaccine-preventable infections. Infants are
at greatest risk for severe pertussis-related morbidity and mortality (~50% of infant
cases require hospitalization) and account for the majority of cases. We sought to
quantify the cost and mortality burden of infant pertussis cases severe enough
to prompt hospitalization. Methods: Data on pertussis-related hospitalizations
(ICD-9-CM discharge codes 033.0, 033.8, 033.9, 484.3) from the 2000-2010 Nationwide
Inpatient Sample (NIS) were retrospectively analyzed. Charges were converted to
costs using a 0.5 cost-to-charge ratio. Weighted, nationally representative estimates
of costs per admission (in 2013 US dollars), length of stay (LOS), and case fatality
rates (CFRs) were descriptively assessed for each year. Results: Total numbers
of infant pertussis hospitalizations in the US followed a cyclic pattern, starting at
2,282 in 2000 and peaking at 5,343 in 2005, then declining to 1,614 in 2007 before
another peak of 3,220 in 2010. Mean [SD] LOS for these hospitalizations fluctuated
minimally year-to-year, but an overall (albeit modest) increase was observed: from
3.3 [7.3] days in 2000 to 3.9 [9.5] days in 2010. Mean [SD] cost per admission increased
at a greater rate than LOS, from $12,377 [$23,985] in 2000 to $16,339 [$37,224] in 2010.
Both LOS and costs were more than double those observed for non-pertussis hospitalizations. CFRs were relatively stable during the period, fluctuating between ~1.5%
and 3%, although a peak of 4.4% occurred in 2005 coinciding with the incidence
peak. Conclusions: Infant pertussis hospitalizations typically exceed 3 days and
are associated with high costs compared with hospitalizations for other causes.
Observed CFRs were consistent with the ~2% fatality rate previously derived from
CDC surveillance. These data may help inform economic and cost-effectiveness
evaluations of future pertussis vaccination programs.
PIN40
Cost Of Erythropoietin Use In The Early Access Program Of
Telaprevir For The Treatment Of Metavir F3-F4 Patients With
Genotype 1 Hcv In Brazil
Morais A.D.
1, Magno L.A.
1, Nogueira C.V.
2
1Janssen Cilag Farmaceutica, São Paulo, Brazil, 2UFRJ, Brazil
Objectives: To estimate the direct medical costs associated with the use of erythropoietin (EPO) in the treatment of anemia in patients with advanced fibrosis and
cirrhosis (METAVIR F3-F4) receiving telaprevir in association with peg-interferon and
ribavirin (TVR+PR) in the early access program in Brazil. Methods: Anemia events
and EPO use during TVR therapy were gathered from published results of 97 patients
in the early access program (EAP) of TVR in Brazil. Anemia treatment was assumed
to be one vial of erythropoietin (EPO) 40.000U per week. Medication unit costs were
gathered from a public (SUS) and private payer perspective in Brazil. Sensitivity
analysis was carried out for anemia treatment duration and patients with EPO
use. A sub-analysis was performed to estimate the cost of anemia treatment with
boceprevir (BOC+PR) based on data from the phase 3 clinical trials. Results: The
cost of EPO during TVR+PR treatment in the EAP /anemic patient was R$ 10.190,04
from a private payer perspective compared to R$ 3.545,06 from a SUS perspective.
The average cost of EPO was R$ 4.727,34 /patient from a private payer perspective and R$ 1.644,87 /patient from the SUS perspective. Considering the sensitivity
analysis, the total cost of EPO treatment ranged between R$ 382.126,50-R$ 601.212,36
from a private payer perspective compared to R$ 132.960,00-R$ 209.190,40 from a
SUS perspective for all patients. Considering EPO use for BOC+PRr, the average anemia treatment cost was R$ 7.851,34 /patient from a private payer perspective and
R$ 2.731,86 /patient from a SUS perspective. Conclusions: In a real life setting,
TVR+PR was associated with EPO use although few patients discontinued treatment.
Compared to EPO use in clinical trials, TVR+PR was associated with less EPO costs
than BOC+PR in a real life setting such as the Brazilian EAP.
PIN41
Costs Of Adverse Events Associated With Treatment Of Hepatitis
C Virus Infection: An Analysis Using The Quebec Provincial Drug
Reimbursement Program Database
Lachaine J.
1, Vachon M.L.
2, Lambert-Obry V.
1, Beauchemin C.
1
1University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2CHUQ, Laval University, Quebec, QC, Canada
Objectives: The objective was to estimate, in a real-life setting, the health care
resource utilization, more specifically resource utilization for management of the
most common adverse events (AE) associated with current treatment of hepatitis
C virus (HCV) infection. Methods: A retrospective study of the Quebec provincial drug reimbursement program (RAMQ) was conducted using a random sample
of patients who filed at least one script at the pharmacy for an HCV medication
(pegylated interferon and ribavirin (peg-Riba) +/- boceprevir or telaprevir) from
2007 to 2013. Data on medical (excluding nurse visits) and pharmaceutical services
were extracted from the RAMQ database. We report health care resources used
during HCV treatment including outpatient physician’s visits and procedures, emergency visits, hospitalization days and costs associated with adverse events, which
included medical services and medications. Results: A total of 962 patients who
used at least one HCV medication were included in the study (mean age: 47.9 years
(SD=10.7), 61.5% males). The proportion of patients who used Peg-Riba only, PegRiba + boceprevir and Peg-Riba + telaprevir was 90.5%, 8.2% and 3.4% and treatment
duration was 31.5 weeks, 30.4 weeks and 21.6 weeks respectively. During HCV treatment, the average number of health care resources used per patient was 13.2 physician’s visits and procedures, 0.8 hospitalization day and 0.8 emergency visit. While
receiving HCV treatment, 20.8% of patients required erythropoietin, 33.3% received
rash treatments and 48.8% were treated for depression. Estimated costs associated
with management of these three AE were CDN$11,199, CDN$85 and CDN$282 per
patient respectively, for a total of CDN$2,399,258 for this cohort. Conclusions:
VALUE IN HEALTH 17 (2014) A1-A295 A273
from remission, progression to long-term adverse outcomes (cirrhosis, decompensated cirrhosis, hepatocellular carcinoma, end-stage liver disease) and commonly
observed side effects (anemia, neutropenia and rash) along with a gradient of their
severity. Model inputs were determined from a review of the published literature
and phase II or III clinical trials. Clinical trials estimates were converted to risk ratios
to facilitate comparison. Costs were inflated to 2013 US dollars. Costs and quality
adjusted life years were discounted at standard rate of 5%. Sensitivity analyses
were performed to assess model sensitivity and address uncertainty. Results:
Relative to treatment with PR only, response-guided triple therapy with BOC+PR
was the most cost effective therapy (ICER $28,723/QALY) followed by responseguided triple therapy with TVR+PR (ICER $64,569/QALY). PR treatments with SIM or
SOF were dominated by BOC+PR. The model was sensitive to variations in costs of
initial drug therapy and likelihood of attaining SVR. Conclusions: Addition of
protease inhibitors to PR therapy improves health outcomes. Response-guided regimen BOC+PR was found to be cost-effective for treating newly diagnosed genotype
1 HCV patients. Shortening of PR therapy guided by a rapid virologic response may
help reduce overall costs. Robust sensitivity analyses can help in overcoming the
challenge of sparse data availability.
PIN48
Cost-Effectiveness Of Ertapenem Versus Piperacillin/Tazobactamin
In Treating Community Acquired Intra-Abdominal Infections In
Colombia
Xie Y.
1, Lemos E.
2, Restrepo M.
2, Ruiz J.
2, Lozano F.
2
1Merck & Co., Whitehouse Station, NJ, USA, 2MSD Colombia, Bogota, Colombia
Objectives: To compare Ertapenem with piperacillin/tazobactam (pip/tazo) for the
treatment of moderate to severe community acquired intra-abdominal infections
(c-IAI) in Colombia health care setting, with respect to cost and outcomes taking
into account development of anti-microbial resistance (AMR). Methods: A previously published decision tree model was adapted to estimate cost-effectiveness
of Ertapenem vs. pip/tazo. Clinical efficacy, adverse events and medical resource
use were derived from literature. AMR to Ertapenem and pip/tazo was calculated
as weighted average based on the % distribution of different pathogens in c-IAI in
Colombia and the sensitivity of Erta vs. pip/tazo for each pathogen from Colombia
SMART data. The resistance-adjusted effectiveness is then computed based on efficacy from clinical trial and local AMR data, Model outcomes included resistance,
clinical success, deaths, life years, direct costs, and costs per successfully treated
patient. Results: The overall resistance of Ertapenem vs. pip/tazo for c-IAI is 21.4%
vs. 43.4%. The resistance-adjusted effectiveness are 70.3% vs. 46% for Ertapenem vs.
pip/tazo. Daily drug costs are 133,550 (Ertapenem) vs. 34,989 (pip/tazo) Colombian
Pesos. Total costs (including drug costs, hospitalization, cost of 2nd-line treatment
& cost of AEs) are 7,162,081 (Ertapenem) vs. 7,230,902 (pip/tazo) Pesos. During the
first hospitalization period, Ertapenem is associated with a 24.3% higher treatment
success rate, and a 68,821 Pesos in cost saving when compared with Pip/tazo. The
Incremental cost per successfully treated patient (ICER) is -283,405 Colombian Pesos
($145.39 USD) for Ertapenem vs. Pip/tazo. Conclusions: Accounting for local antimicrobial resistance, Ertapenem is more effective and cost-saving vs. pip/tazo for
the treatment of moderate to severe community acquired intra-abdominal infections in Colombia.
PIN49
Cost-Effectiveness Analysis Of Joint Vaccination With 13-Valent
Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine (Pcv13) And Influenza Vaccine In
Taiwan During Seasonal Influenza
Wu D.B.C., Chong H.Y., Lee K.K.C.
Monash University Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Objectives: Pneumococcal diseases and influenza have caused substantial clinical and economic burden in Taiwan especially in high-risk groups such as infants
and elderly. It has been shown that influenza can increase the risk of pneumococcal diseases compared to those uninfected during a seasonal influenza. The costeffectiveness of PCV13 has been previously established. Influenza vaccine (INFv) is
generally considered as an effective prevention of influenza and is therefore useful
in alleviating the burden of influenza in reducing morbidities and mortalities. This
study aims to evaluate the potential cost-effectiveness of joint 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13) and INFv vs influenza vaccine alone for infants and
elderly. Methods: An age-stratified decision tree model was developed to simulate
clinical and economic impacts of joint vaccination with PCV13 and INFv in newborns
and elderly compared to influenza vaccine alone during a seasonal influenza over a
1-year time horizon. Direct medical costs, epidemiological, demographic parameters
are Taiwan-specific. Effectiveness of vaccines is based on previous trials adjusted for
local age-specific stereotype distributions. Herd effect estimates were extrapolated
from the US post-PCV surveillance data. The study was performed from a payer
perspective. Current market prices of vaccines were used. One-way and multivariate probabilistic sensitivity analyses were performed to identify influential factors
to outcomes. Results: Compared to influenza vaccination alone, over 1-year time
horizon, joint vaccination of PCV13 and INFv is predicted to prevent 386 cases of
invasive pulmonary diseases, 4,232 cases of all-cause pneumonia, 32,652 cases of
acute otitis media and 202 deaths (equivalent to 3,131 life years). The universal
vaccination is expected to save NT$352,593,433 (US$11,753,114) in direct medical
cost equivalent to NT$947,629 (US$31,587) per life year gained. The results are sensitive to vaccine prices and incidence of influenza. Conclusions: Using WHOrecommended cost-effectiveness threshold, universal vaccination program with
PCV13 and INFv appears to be a cost-effective policy in Taiwan.
PIN50
Cost-Effectiveness Of Various Clostridium Difficile Infection (CDI)
Treatments In Patients With Recurrent Infections
Massachi S., Hay J.W.
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
group (65%). After 6 months, patients treated with SISEM had substantially higher
ulcer-free weeks compared to SC (20.0 versus 16.8, respectively). Expected direct
costs per patient were $2,360 for SISEM and $1,326 for SC. The incremental costeffectiveness ratio (ICER) for SISEM was $349 (approximately $50/day), indicating
that for each $349 paid for SISEM therapy patients gained one additional ulcer-free
week. Conclusions: SISEM yielded better outcomes at a slightly higher cost in
patients with mixed A/V and VLUs. SISEM is an effective treatment for wound healing and should be considered for use in the management of mixed A/V and VLUs.
PIN45
Quadrivalent Hpv Vaccine In Argentina: Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
Caporale J.
1, Alcaraz A.
1, Rey-Ares L.
2, Pichon-Riviere A.
1, Bardach A.
1, Augustovski F.
1,
Klein K.
1, Tatti S.
3
1Institute for Clinical Effectiveness and Health Policy (IECS), Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2Institute
for Clinical Effectiveness and Health Policy (IECS), CABA, Argentina, 3Hospital de Clínicas, Buenos
Aires, Argentina
Objectives: To assess the cost-effectiveness of the introduction of the quadrivalent HPV vaccine in Argentina. Methods: Using a transmission dynamic model
developed and published by Elbasha in 2008 we evaluated the routine vaccination
of 11-year-old girls over a time horizon of 100 years from the perspective of the
health care system Results: The model showed that the introduction of the vaccine will gradually reduce the incidence of cervical cancer, CIN 1/2/3, and genital
warts related to HPV 6/11/16/18. When compared with non-vaccination, a women
who completed the three dose scheme will experience a reduction of cervical cancer
incidence and death, CIN2/3, CIN1 and genital warts of 58,6%, 59,2%, 56,7%, 56,3%
and 67,3% respectively. Considering a 5% discount rate and a 43,8% of complete
scheme coverage without heard immunity, the incremental cost-effectiveness ratio
(ICER) was 795 USD per quality-adjusted life-year (QALY) gained. The additional
protection against HPV types 6/11 has a great influence in the cost-effectiveness,
the ICER was almost doubled when not contemplated the protection against HPV
6/11. The most influential parameters on the scenario analysis were the discount
rate, the cost of the vaccine and the cost of treatment. However, the vaccine was
very cost-effective (less than one gross domestic product=7844 USD) in all the tested
scenarios. Conclusions: The implementation of routine HPV vaccination with
the quadrivalent vaccine in 11-year-old girls in Argentina could provide significant
benefits to public health by reducing cervical cancer incidence and death rates
and the incidence of CIN 1/2/3 and genital warts, making it a highly cost-effective
intervention
PIN46
Assessment Of Real-Life Predictive Power Of A New CostEffectiveness Model In Hiv: Antiretroviral Analysis By Monte Carlo
Individual Simulation (ARAMIS-DTG)
Despiégel N.
1, Anger D.
1, Martin M.
2, Monga N.
3, Cui Q.
3, Gilchrist K.
4, Refoios Camejo R.
5
1OptumInsight, Nanterre, France, 2OptumInsight, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UK, 3GlaxoSmithKline,
Mississauga, ON, Canada, 4GlaxoSmithKline, King of Prussia, PA, USA, 5GlaxoSmithKline,
Brentford, UK
Objectives: The validation of complex economic models against observational
cohorts tests the accuracy of structural assumptions in models and the relationship between variables and the validity of model outcomes. However, these exercises are seldom conducted and published. The study objectives were to assess
how well a newly developed economic model for HIV (ARAMIS-DTG) predicts CD4+
cell-count changes and AIDS-related outcomes and to explore drivers of eventual
discrepancies between simulated and observed outcomes. Methods: Clinical outcomes from ARAMIS-DTG were compared to an observational cohort of patients
initiating antiretroviral treatment in the British Columbia Centre for Excellence
(BC-CfE) between 2008 and 2011. Baseline population characteristics and treatment efficacy were modified to reflect the observational cohort in the model, and
mean changes in CD4+ cell-count and incidence rates of AIDS-related events were
simulated in ARAMIS-DTG. The impact of relevant ARAMIS parameters on these
outcomes, such as mortality or virological suppression, was assessed in sensitivity
analyses. Results: In the base case analysis, the average CD4+ cell-count over five
years increased from 295 to 682 cells/µL in ARAMIS-DTG and from 303 to 532 cells/
µL in the BC-CfE cohort, reflecting a potential overestimation of adherence in the
clinical trial setting. However, despite a higher CD4+ cell-count, the incidence of
AIDS-related events was also higher in ARAMIS: 3.81 vs. 2.84 per 100,000 personyears, suggesting the higher incidence of AIDS-related events in ARAMIS-DTG was
mostly attributable to the pre-2005 rates used to inform the model. Sensitivity analyses produced similar results without adjusting ARAMIS-DTG to the BC-CfE cohort
characteristics. Conclusions: Although results highlight the need for calibrating
economic models and accounting for factors such as adherence to achieve better
alignment with real life data, in the particular case of ARAMIS-DTG the differences
between simulated and observed outcomes did not significantly affect its overall
cost-effectiveness outcomes.
PIN47
Cost-Effectiveness Of Pharmacotherapies For Treatment Naïve
Hepatitis C Genotype 1 Patients: A Payer’s Perspective
Jalundhwala YJ, Manzoor B.S., Patel H., Cheng W.H., Patel P., Touchette D.R.
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
Objectives: Our objective was to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of currently
recommended pharmacotherapies [response-guided triple therapies with
pegylated-interferon plus ribavarin (PR) plus boceprevir (BOC) or telaprevir (TVR) or
simeprevir (SIM) or sofosbuvir (SOF)] for the treatment of newly diagnosed patients
with genotype 1 chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, from payer’s perspective. Methods: A Markov cohort model was developed to simulate the disease
progression of treatment naïve HCV patients initiating therapy. The model included
the following outcomes: sustained virologic response (SVR) i.e. absence of detectable RNA of virus in blood serum at 12/24 weeks after ending treatment, relapse 