35 Clirnical InvestigSSAtn
Multicenter Trial of Cadexomer Iodine to
Treat Venous Stasis Ulcer
G. ALLEN HOLLOWAY, Jr, MD, Phoenix; KAJ H. JOHANSEN, MD, PhD, Seattle;
ROBERT W. BARNES, MD, Little Rock, Arkansas; and GEORGE E. PIERCE, MD, Kansas City, Kansas
In a crossover study designed to judge the efficacy of the topical polymeric starch iodophore,
cadexomer iodine, in accelerating the healing of venous stasis ulcers, 75 patients were prospectively
randomly assigned to receive either cadexomer iodine or standard treatment. The control treatment
consisted of a standard saline wet-to-dry compressive dressing. The patients improved with either
treatment: ulcers healed more than twice as rapidly using cadexomer iodine (n = 38) as with standard
therapy (n = 37) (P = .0025). Ulcers treated with cadexomer iodine showed trends toward less pain,
exudate, pus, and debris, and a more rapid development of granulation tissue. Twelve patients
crossed over from control treatment to the use of cadexomer iodine because of a failure to heal, but
no patients switched to control therapy from the use of cadexomer iodine (P =.0 1). Except for
occasional mild local burning in wounds treated with cadexomer iodine, no adverse effects were
noted with either regimen.
(Holloway GA Jr, Johansen KH, Barnes RW, et al: Multicenter trial of cadexomer iodine to treat venous stasis ulcer. West J Med
1989 Jul; 151 :35-38)
jenous disorders are the most common ailments involving the vascular system. It is estimated that 250,000
new cases of deep venous thrombosis occur each year in the
United States.I Many such patients go on to have the postthrombotic syndrome; more than 1 % of all adults in Scotland2 and in Switzerland3 have been affected by venous ulceration, and perhaps as many as 500,000 stasis ulcers are
treated annually in this country. '
Venous stasis ulcers are difficult and time-consuming to
heal and commonly recur many times. While these lesions
are rarely lethal, they exact an extraordinary toll in patient
inconvenience, frustration, disfigurement, pain, and incapacitation. The economic cost of venous stasis ulcers in
terms of time lost from work and the use of medical resources
is staggering. 1-3
Neither an optimal prophylaxis against deep venous
thrombosis nor a curative treatment of chronic venous insufficiency has been identified. Thus, the current management
is restricted to palliating the long-term complications of the
postthrombotic syndrome. Prolonged bed rest with leg elevation will heal nearly all venous stasis ulcers, but this is costly
and must be reserved for selected refractory cases, as is also
true for surgical ulcer excision and grafting. Multiple topical
treatments-compresses of salicylic acid; enzymes to accelerate ulcer debridement; the application of synthetic or preserved xenogeneic wound dressings; the use of steroids, antibiotics, antiseptics, or silver salts-have been found, at best,
only minimally effective in controlled trials: none have been
demonstrably better than the classic wet-to-dry saline compress approach.
Recently hydrophilic dextran polymer beads (dextranomer [Debrisan]) have been used topically on venous stasis
ulcers, on the principle that the hygroscopic removal of
wound secretions might retard surface infection and thereby
accelerate wound healing and epithelialization.4 By this process the wound surface is kept clean, but a culture medium
theoretically remains in the bead interstices. Cadexomer iodine (Iodosorb [Perstorp Carbotec, Perstorp, Sweden]), a
starch polymer bead similar to dextranomer but with iodide
(0.9 % weight per weight) bonded to the polymer, extends
this principle. When fluid contacts the beads, substantial
amounts of fluid-as much as 6 ml per gram of cadexomer
iodine-are absorbed, as well as bacteria within the fluid. In
addition, bonded iodide becomes bactericidal in this milieu.
Treatment with cadexomer iodine should theoretically result
in a wound that contains both less secretions and fewer bacteria, thereby promoting wound healing. We evaluated the
use of cadexomer iodine in the management of venous stasis
ulcers by means of a prospective, randomized crossover trial
in which the use of this agent was compared with that of a
standard treatment approach at three university hospitals.
Patients and Methods
In all, 75 outpatients, 55 men and 20 women, were entered into the trial at three sites-Richmond, Virginia;
Kansas City, Kansas; and Seattle, Washington. Their ages
From the Departments of Surgery, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle (Drs Holloway and Johansen), Virginia
Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond (Dr Barnes), and University of Kansas Medical Center School of Medicine, Kansas City (Dr Pierce).
Dr Holloway is currently with the Maricopa Medical Center, Phoenix, and Dr Barnes is with the University of Arkansas College of Medicine, Little Rock.
Technical assistance was provided by Molly Zaccardi, Glenn Turley, Linda Klein, RN, ET, and Paul Cunningham.
This study was funded by a grant from T.I.L. (Medical) Ltd, Toronto, Canada.
Reprint requests to Kaj H. Johansen, MD, PhD, Department of Surgery, Harborview Medical Center, 325 9th Ave, Seattle, WA 98104.
IODINE
ranged from 31 to 93 years. Informed consent, approved by
each site's institutional review board, was obtained from
each patient. Inclusion criteria required a patient to be in
good health and to have had a venous stasis ulcer present for a
minimum of three months. Initially patients with ulcers less
than 2 cm in maximum diameter were excluded, but this
criterion was relaxed partway through the trial. Potential
subjects were excluded if there was a suspected or proven
nonvenous cause of the ulcer, an inability to comply with the
treatment regimen, major medical disorders, an iodine allergy, or clinically significant arterial disease.
The initial patient evaluation included a relevant history,
a physical examination, and laboratory studies, with an emphasis on blood, kidney, liver, and thyroid profiles. The ulcer
size was measured planimetrically on transparent tracings.
Ulcers were graded as "very superficial" (through skin),
"superficial" (through subcutaneous tissue), or "deep" (into
or through muscle, near bone). Surface characteristics of the
ulcer-quantity of exudate, pus, debris, amount and quality
of granulation tissue, degree of edema, and erythema-and
pain were all recorded on an analog scale, and a color photograph of the ulcer, taken at a standard distance and under
controlled lighting, was obtained. Swabs of the ulcer bed for
aerobic and anaerobic culture, using Stuart's transport medium modified to neutralize the iodine during subsequent
treatment, were taken for bacteriologic purposes. Noninvasive arterial and venous studies, carried out to confirm the
underlying venous pathophysiology, included arterial and venous Doppler, venous outflow strain-gauge plethysmography, and photoplethysmography.
After the initial studies were done, patients were randomly assigned to either the standard or cadexomer iodine
treatment groups. Standard treatment consisted of wetto-dry dressings with saline-soaked sterile 4-in by 4-in gauze
pads changed by the patient once a day. In the cadexomer
iodine-treated patients, the ulcer was irrigated with a saline
solution, the medication was sprinkled onto the ulcer, and
the wound was covered with a dry gauze dressing. This treatment was repeated on a daily basis by the patient. In both
groups the dressing was held in place by a toe-to-knee elastic
compression bandage.
Follow-up was at two-week intervals for the first eight
weeks and then at monthly intervals. Each ulcer was evaluated serially by the same person at each medical center.
Patients were removed from the study when their ulcer
healed or if it was felt by the attending physician that, due to
worsening of the ulcer, more intensive therapy-that is, operative excision and grafting-was needed. At each visit a
bacteriologic swab was taken, the ulcer was measured and
traced, and a photograph taken. Ulcer healing was expressed
in square centimeters per week and in square centimeters per
week per centimeter of baseline ulcer circumference. At 12
weeks, the physical examination and the general laboratory
studies were repeated. Also, if the ulcer was not healed at this
time, the patient was offered the opportunity to switch to the
alternate therapy group. Patients were questioned about
compliance at each visit.
When an ulcer was healed, or at the end of 24 weeks, the
patient was reexamined, laboratory tests were done, and the
ulcer was reevaluated in the vascular laboratory in the same
manner as at the beginning ofthe study.
Data from all patients were serially collated for statistical
analysis. The Student's t test was used for comparing pretrial
baseline studies and laboratory studies. An analysis ofcovariance was used for assessing differences in the healing rate.
Statistical significance was assumed for P values of less than
.05.
Results
Of the 75 patients starting the trial, 15 did not complete
the study for reasons other than healing of the ulcer. Four
failed to respond to one or both treatments and required more
aggressive treatment. Two died during the study of causes
unrelated to their ulcers, and nine dropped out or failed to
return. An additional six patients were excluded from the
statistical analysis. Two of these were felt in retrospect to
have been inappropriately entered into the study because
their ulcers were too small. The other four lacked adequate
follow-up information. Subjects failed to complete the study
or were excluded from analysis in equivalent proportions
from the control and cadexomer iodine-treated groups, and
noninclusion did not appear to influence the study's analysis
or conclusions. A total of 54 patients remained from whom
data were available for statistical analysis.
The two treatment groups were similar in all baseline
characteristics, although the mean ulcer duration before
treatment was considerably greater in the cadexomer iodinetreated group than in the control group (Table 1). The mean
ulcer area was substantially-although not significantly: P =
.11-greater in the cadexomer iodine-treated group, primarily due to randomization to this group of two patients
with giant ulcers measuring 136.2 cm2 and 127.3 cm2, respectively.
Ulcer healing was significantly (P < .0001) different
from zero in both the control and the cadexomer iodine treatment groups at all three centers. The healing rate for patients
undergoing standard treatment was 0.41 cm2 per week, compared with 0.95 cm2 per week in those treated with cadexomer iodine (P = .0025; Table 2). This healing advantage
achieved statistical significance both in the overall group and
at two of the three individual centers; the P value at the third
center was .09. Healing as a proportion of the baseline ulcer
circumference approached statistical significance in the cadexomer iodine-treated group (P = .072). Overall, treatment
with cadexomer iodine accelerated healing 1.5 to 2.5 times
compared with standard treatment. A trend toward improvement in terms of enhanced granulation and diminished
TABLE 1.-Patient Characteristics
Ulcer Treatment
Patient and Standard Cadexomer Iodine
Ulcer Characteristics (n=37) (n=38)
Male, No. .......... 27 28
Female, No.......... 10 10
Age* (range), yr ...... 61.5±12.7 (31-84) 63.0±0.8 (34-93)
Duration of ulcer, mo* . . 11.4±21.8 29.5±59.1
Median (range) ... . 4.5 (3-130) 7.5 (3-240)
Area of ulcer, cm2
Mean ........... 11.20 20.05
Median (range) ... . 9.75 (3.0-37.0) 10.70 (0.6-136.0)
Depth of ulcert
Deep ........... 13 18
Superficial ....... 17 15
Very superficial .... 7 5
[PIus or minus standard error of the mean.
tSee text (Methods section) for description of depth.
36 CADEXOMER IODINE
edema,
THE~~~~~~~
pain,
WETRlORA
exudate,
~
pus, and
FMDCN
~
debris
~
was
~
UY18
also
~
noted with
5 13
the use of cadexomer iodine; this trend did not achieve statistical significance (Table 3).
As expected, numerous bacterial species were isolated
from the ulcers. Neither treatment was superior in causing a
reduction in bacterial numbers on a semiquantitative (categorized as profuse, moderate, or sparse) basis. A persistence of
pathogenic organisms, even at levels often associated with
invasive infection,5 was frequently associated with rapid
healing. On the other hand, the presence of f-hemolytic
streptococci was almost invariably associated with a failure
to heal6; only one patient with cultures positive for streptococci had ulcer healing.
A total of 12 patients switched treatments during the trial:
all 12 crossed over from the control treatment to using cadexomer iodine because of a failure of healing, but no patient
switched to control therapy from cadexomer iodine (P =
.01, Fisher's exact test). Of the 12 patients, 5 did not benefit
from the crossover, and the other 7 showed healing of their
ulcers.
Only minimal adverse effects were noted with cadexomer
iodine treatment and none with the control treatment. Six
patients had mild transient burning, pain, or itching associated with using cadexomer iodine. No other symptoms could
be related to the experimental treatment.
Although there were insignificant changes in serum
chemistry values in both study groups, no specific patterns or
correlations with treatment were seen. Of specific interest,
no significant changes in thyroid function were seen in either
group.
Discussion
Browse and Burnand have proposed that venous stasis
ulcers occur when the pathologically altered venous hemodynamics of the postthrombotic syndrome result in the interstitial deposition of fibrinogen, with subsequent fibrosis, cutaneous ischemia, skin breakdown, and ulcer formation.7
Ideally, venous function might be improved to allow healing
of venous stasis ulcers, but this is usually not possible or, at
least, not feasible, and clinicians are left to deal with the
chronic ulcerative complications of the postthrombotic syndrome.
We evaluated the ability of a starch polymer iodophore,
cadexomer iodine, to accelerate the healing of venous stasis
ulcers. The results of a three-center randomized crossover
trial indicate that both standard saline wet-to-dry and cadexomer iodine treatments are effective in reducing ulcer size
and promoting healing. Treatment with cadexomer iodine
healed ulcers significantly more rapidly than standard treatment, a finding in accordance with two previous European
trials.8'9 In our study, the mean ulcer healing rate was more
than twice as great with the use of cadexomer iodine as with
the control treatment.
The cleansing action of the two treatments was evaluated
on visual analog scales that assessed the amount of exudate,
pus, and debris at the ulcer surface. Both treatments appeared to be highly effective in improving wound appearance: cadexomer iodine appeared to be more effective, although not at the level of statistical significance. Removing
exudate and dead tissue, both of which provide an excellent
bacterial culture medium, presumably results in a better environment for epithelialization and healing. Pain and edema
were also substantially reduced by both treatments, again
with a trend favoring the use oftopical cadexomer iodine.
Bacteriologic studies showed that in both treatment
groups the number of organisms decreased during the study,
with neither showing superiority. It is unclear, however,
whether this represents a response to the topical treatment or,
alternatively, a response to an improved healing process. A
decrease in the number of organisms was commonly associated with healing. On the other hand, ulcers often healed
despite the persistent presence or even profuse growth of
pathogenic organisms. This apparently occurs because most
such bacteria primarily colonize the superficial exudate and
debris of the venous stasis ulcer. The presence of j-hemolytic streptococci, however, was associated with a failure to
heal in all but one patient. This is in keeping with previous
experience6 and presumably occurs because this organism is
tissue-invasive. These results support the systemic use of
antibiotics in patients having ,3-hemolytic streptococci on
venous stasis ulcer culture.
No significant adverse effects were noted during the trial
other than mild transient local burning noted by a few of the
cadexomer iodine-treated patients. This has been reported in
other trials using iodine-containing compounds but has not
been associated with other or more severe effects. None of
the laboratory safety monitoring-hematology, clinical
chemistry, urinalysis, or thyroid function-showed any consistent changes that could be related to the treatment.
This trial shows that both standard wet-to-dry dressings
and the topical use of cadexomer iodine promote the healing
of venous stasis ulcers. In this study, the latter was more than
twice as effective (P = .0025) in promoting healing. Both
treatment methods appear to improve the environment for
healing by cleaning the ulcer surface and thereby accelerating the development of ulcer granulation tissue and epithelialization. Comparing the use of cadexomer iodine with
other recently introduced topical agents or treatments might
further delineate the means by which venous stasis ulcers
heal. Topical cadexomer iodine may be a useful addition to
TABLE 2.-Response to Treatment and Ulcer Healing
Treatment* Treatment' Difference Between
Cadexomer Treatments,
Treatment Response Standard Iodine P Value
Ulcer healing, cm2/wk ..... 0.41±0.13 0.95±0.12 .0025
Ulcer healing vs baseline
circumference, cm2lwk/cm2 0.03±0.01 0.04±0.01 .0720
'The numbers show the mean rate of change plus or minus the standard error of
the mean.
TABLE 3.-Response to Treatment
Difference
Treatment* Treatment' Between ~~Treatments, Ulcer Characteristics Standard Cadexomer Iodine P Value
Granulation .... 2.75±0.4 3.43±0.3 .16
Edema .......... -1.40±0.2 -1.60±0.2 .53
Pain .. .. -2.44±0.4 -2.47±0.3 .96
Exudate ... . -2.51±0.3 -3.11±0.3 .20
Pus and debris ..... -2.43±0.3 -2.68+0.3 .55
Erythema ........ -1.86±0.3 -1.14±0.3 .06
'The numbers show the mean rate of change plus or minus the standard error of
the mean.
THE WESTERN JOURNAL OF MEDICINE - JULY 1989 * 151 * 1 37
38 CADEXOMER IODINE
the therapeutic armamentarium ofclinicians treating patients
with venous stasis ulcers.
REFERENCES
1. Coon WW, Willis PW, Keller JB: Venous thromboembolism and other venous disease in the Tecumseh Community Health Study. Circulation 1973;
48:839-847
2. Ruckley CV, Dale JJ, Callam MJ, et al: Causes of chronic leg ulcers (Letter).
Lancet 1982; 2:615-616
3. Widmer LK, Mall T, Martin H: Epidemiological and sociomedical importance of peripheral vascular disease, In Hobbs JT (Ed): The Treatment of Venous
Disorders, Vol 1. Lancaster, England, MTP Press, 1977, pp 3-12
4. Jacobsson S, Rothman U, Arthurson G, et al: A new principle for the
cleansing of infected wounds. Scand J Plast Reconstr Surg 1976; 10:65-67
5. Krizek TJ, Robson MJ: Evolution of quantitative bacteriology in wound management. Am J Surg 1975; 130:579-584
6. Robson MC, Heggers JP: Surgical infection-II. The ,3-hemolytic streptococcus. J Surg Res 1969; 9:289-292
7. Browse NL, Burnand KG: The postphlebitic syndromes: A new look, chap
25, In Bergan JJ, Yao JST (Eds): Venous Problems. Chicago, Year Book Medical,
1978, pp 395-404
8. Skog E, Arnesjo B, Troeng T, et al: A randomized trial comparing cadexomer
iodine and standard treatment in the out-patient management of chronic venous
ulcers. Br J Dermatol 1983; 109:77-83
9. Ormiston MC, Seymour MTJ, Venn GE, et al: Controlled trial of Iodosorb in
chronic venous ulcers. Br Med J [Clin Resl 1985; 291:308-3 10
Pupil Response
IN NONTRAUMATIC COMA, excluding drug-induced coma, one can perhaps make some
prognostication on the best recovery at one year by noting the presence or absence of the
pupil response, corneal reflex, or caloric response at the time the patient is admitted. If two
or more of these are absent, only 1 % of these patients at one year will have moderate
disability to good recovery. Of these patients 99% will either have no recovery-they've
died-vegetative state, or perhaps severe disability.
In comatose head-injured patients one can perhaps "predict" the mortality rate at 6
months by noting the pupillary response. In one study, if both pupils were reactive, the
mortality rate at 6 months was 37 %; if only one pupil was reactive at the time of admission,
the mortality rate increased to 57 %; and if both pupils were unreactive, the mortality rate
increased to 83 %.
The hallmark of metabolic coma is preserved pupil response despite substantial respiratory depression, absent caloric response, or decerebrate posturing.
Atropine, glutethimide, and barbiturates ... will alter the pupil and may mimic structural-induced coma.
The pupil from pontine lesions will be a pinpoint pupil, but the pupil will still be reactive
if one were to use a hand-held magnifier to examine the pupil reflex.
-LENWORTH N. JOHNSON, MD
Extracted from Audio-Digest Ophthalmology, Vol. 29, No. 09, in the AudioDigest Foundation's series of tape-recorded programs. For subscription information: 1577 E Chevy Chase Dr, Glendale, CA 91206
38 CADEXOMER IODINE