Summary
Low level laser therapy (LLLT) has been used in the treatment of wounds.
Issues related to use of the technology in this application are definition of
standard protocols and evidence of effectiveness.
Low level lasers most commonly used for wound treatment are the gallium
arsenide (GaAs), gallium aluminum arsenide infrared semiconductor
(GaAlAs) and the helium neon (HeNe) devices.
Differences exist in the delivery of LLLT. Variables include pulse rate,
duration of treatment, applicator placement (contact or non-contact),
wavelengths and spot size.
To date, neither Health Canada nor the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
has approved low energy lasers for use in wound healing.
A systematic review of the literature indicates that the efficacy of LLLT in this
application is not established. There is no good scientific evidence to support
its use.
Any local use of LLLT in this application should be supported by empirical
data from good quality studies of its efficacy and effectiveness.
Other, possibly more promising alternative therapies should be considered as
adjunct therapies to conventional wound healing practices.
2
Introduction
A request for information about the use of low level laser therapy (LLLT) to
assist wound healing was received from the Capital Health Authority (CHA).
This technology has been increasingly used within the Edmonton area, with
somewhat different approaches being taken by individual operators. The
concern was whether there was any scientific evidence to show the effectiveness
of LLLT in accelerating the wound healing process. As well, the CHA was
lacking formalized protocols that would detail dosage parameters and proper
timing or sequencing of laser exposure to the various phases of wound healing.
There is controversy surrounding the use of LLLT in this application. This
technology assessment focuses on the efficacy, effectiveness and safety of the
approach in general terms and as it pertains to medical practice in Alberta.
Economic aspects of LLLT used to accelerate wound healing are beyond the
scope of this study.
The methodology used in the assessment is outlined in Appendix A. Only
clinical studies were considered.
Low level laser therapy, also known as low intensity and low power therapy, is
considered to work through a photochemical response to laser light that induces
biochemical alterations in cells, leading to physiological changes. Several
authors suggest that the laser radiation has a wavelength-dependent capability
to alter cellular processes without significant heating (2, 10, 11, 20, 32). It is this
characteristic that therapists make use of when applying low level laser therapy
to accelerate wound healing. The cellular response to laser light coined the terms
„photobiology‟ and „biostimulation‟ (11)
.
The clinical use and research in low energy lasers owe much of their popularity
to work begun in Hungary and other eastern European countries in the
mid-1960s. Accelerated wound healing was one of the first effects reported by
early investigators. Early laser therapy reports were enthusiastic and anecdotal,
but contained no clear mechanism of action.
Although laser therapy remains on the fringes of Canadian medicine, general
interest has increased as determined by the increased volume of current
literature available (25). A review article written in 1995 describes the
controversial use of low intensity laser irradiation in clinical settings. Use of this
therapy stems from the favourable results shown in laboratory studies. It is here
that the scientific rationale of laser therapy first gave an impression of the
influences that laser irradiation can have on cellular processes (2)
.
3
Description of LLLT technology
The types of laser therapy devices used for LLLT are shown in Table 1 and
include the gallium arsenide, gallium aluminum arsenide infrared
semiconductor lasers (GaAs and GaAlAs, respectively) and the helium neon
laser (HeNe). Despite similarities of dose and a convergence in laser choice,
significant differences persist between treatment approaches. These differences
include pulse rate, applicator placement (contact or non-contact), and the use of
a single wavelength or a combination of wavelengths. Also of potential
importance are the irradiance (power/unit area), beam divergence, spot size,
delivery (fiber optic, direct), polarity, and for pulsed devices, pulse duration and
duty cycle. Reported individual treatment times range anywhere from 35
seconds to 20 minutes. Any protocol development of laser therapy should
preferably include consideration of all these parameters as well as information
about site preparation, technique and number of treatments (2, 10, 11)
.
The lasers listed in Table 1 are those most commonly used for LLLT. The
therapy is often used in combination with other alternative therapies such as
ultraviolet light, ultrasound or hyperbaric oxygen (see Table 2). The uses of
concurrent therapies make it difficult to frame a definitive statement on the
effects of laser therapy alone.
Table 1: Low level lasers in clinical use for wound healing
Laser type Wavelength Indications treated
Helium neon (HeNe) 632.8 nm soft tissue wounds, arthritis
Gallium arsenide (GaAs) 904 nm soft tissue wounds
Gallium aluminum
arsenide (GaAlAs)
820, 830 nm soft tissue wounds
Regulatory considerations
The Health Protection Branch in Canada and the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) in the U.S. were contacted about regulatory status for low level lasers used
for wound healing.
Health Canada
In Canada, low lever lasers are regulated as Class 2 or Class 3(a) devices under
standards such as those written by the Canadian Standards Association (CSA),
the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and Underwriters
Laboratories (UL). Such standards address laser safety in health care facilities,
medical electrical equipment, and safety of diagnostic and therapeutic laser
equipment. In Canada, lasers have not been approved for use in wound healing.
Health Canada Device Licensing staff request a Device Evaluation Division 
4
Opinion before licensing a device for a novel indication such as promoting
wound healing. The Regulations state that clinical data are required in support
of efficacy prior to licensing. They also define the requirements for carrying out
clinical trials in Canada.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
In the United States, medical lasers must have premarket approval or premarket
clearance from the FDA prior to marketing for any claimed human indication,
unless specifically exempted by the FDA. To date, the FDA has approved no
biostimulation laser therapy devices for humans; therefore, it is illegal in the U.S.
to make any claims of clinical effectiveness. The Office of Compliance has issued
notifications and warnings to firms suspected of illegally marketing these
devices with claims of effectiveness. Low level laser units cannot be introduced
into commerce legally for human treatment, unless via an Investigational Device
Exemption or with Institutional Review Board approval.
Although there appear to be no safety concerns regarding low level lasers, they
have not received regulatory approval from Health Canada or the FDA as a
therapy to accelerate wound healing.
Evidence of efficacy and effectiveness
Best evidence
The Cochrane Wound Group Trials Register identified four RCTs of laser
therapy pertaining to treatment of venous leg ulcers (3, 7, 10, 21, 22). Each of the
studies contained very small numbers of participants with group sizes varying
between 15 to 23. All patients were deemed to have venous leg ulceration,
though none of the trials reported the diagnostic criteria. The results of the
studies suggested that there were no improvements in the healing rate of venous
ulcers with the use of low level laser therapy. The only suggestion of therapeutic
benefit was shown in one small RCT where a combination of laser and infrared
light led to an improvement in the healing rates of venous ulcers (3). The
Cochrane Review stated that more research is needed before a clear direction for
medical practice is identified (10)
.
In the literature search undertaken for the present assessment, a further six
primary studies of LLLT effectiveness for wound healing were identified (14, 15, 20,
24, 28, 30) and are summarized in Table 2. They include a non-randomized
controlled prospective study, two randomized controlled trials, a prospective
comparative study and two non-controlled clinical series. Although two of these
investigations had the potential to provide a good level of scientific evidence, the
numbers of subjects were small and/or variables were uncontrolled.
5
Table 2: Studies of LLLT on open wounds
Study Patient characteristics Therapy Outcomes Comments
Gogia et al. (14)
Non-randomized,
controlled, prospective
study
1992
n=12
Control group:
n=6
Age: 63.0 ( 12.8 y)
Experimental group:
n=6
Age: 58.5 ( 12.8 y)
Ulcer duration: min. 8 wks
Both groups: sterile whirlpool with
Betadine at 100 F, followed by
sterile saline wet-to-dry dressings
covered with gauze and cotton mesh
wrapping.
Experimental group also received
HeNe laser at 632.8 nm and 1 mW
power output, energy density of 2
J/cm2 before dressings were applied.
Both groups were administered to
once daily, five days per week for 20
trtmts. Time duration of each laser
session not given.
Overall healing of the wound
area was slightly greater in the
control group as compared to the
experimental group. There was
no significantly accelerated
healing of the lower leg/foot
ulcers treated with HeNe laser.
The findings of this study failed
to show an enhanced rate of
wound healing with HeNe laser
stimulation. Further controlled
clinical studies on a large
number of patients are needed to
warrant the clinical efficacy of
low-energy lasers in enhancing
wound healing in humans.
Poor level of scientific evidence,
very small patient sample*.
Telfer et al (30)
Clinical series
[to define and obtain
technical data in order
to conduct future
double-blind, placebocontrolled study, see
Gupta et al. (15)]
1993
n=12
(15 ulcers, venous insufficiency,
post-traumatic, pressure and
burn origin)
Age: 35-96 y
Ulcer duration: 4 wks to 50 y
Patients were treated with low
energy photon therapy (LEPT) as an
add-on modality to conventional
treatment.
LEPT administered with a microprocessor-controlled device to
provide adequate laser parameters.
- 22 red-head provided 6mW power,
dose 4-6 J/cm2
- 7 infrared-head provided 12 mW
power, dose 4 J/cm2.. Time duration
of each laser session not given.
Outpatients treated 3X/wk, inpatients
5X/wk. Number of trtmts appeared to
depend on ulcer size and healing
rate depended on number of
sessions rather than on the total
course duration.
Thirteen ulcers (87%) completely
healed, two decreased in size by
75%. Smallest ulcer healed after
5 sessions, a larger, 3-cm ulcer
healed after 25 sessions. One
ulcer (9-cm X 2-cm) required two
courses, separated by one
month, of 30 sessions each.
Abstract only.
Authors state that based on this
pilot study a double blind study
will be initiated.
6
Table 2: Studies of LLLT on open wounds, con’t
Study Patient characteristics Therapy Outcomes Comments
Nussbaum et al. (24)
RCT
1994
n=20
(pressure ulcers in spinal cord
injury (SCI) patients)
Control group: n=9
Age: 36 y
US/UVC group: n=5
Age: 42.2 y
Laser group: n=6
Age: 42 y
Control group: All patients received
wound cleansing 2X daily using
Hygeol (1:20), and (moist) Jelonet
dressings.
US/UVC group: US applied to skin
surrounding wound for 5 min per 5
cm2
of wound area, frequency of 3
MHz and a SATA intensity of 0.2
W/cm2
(1:4 pulse ratio). US
treatment was alternated daily for 5
days/wk with UVC applied using a
cold-quartz lamp. Time and distance
of UVC treatment was dependent on
wound surface appearance.
Laser group: Treatment was applied
3X/wk in contact, probe centered
over the wound using a 820 nm
diode and 30 superluminous diodes
at 660, 880 and 950 nm, 120
mW/cm2
, pulse repetition rate at
5,000 pps, energy density at 4J/cm2
for 35 s, 3X per week.
Four patients did not complete
the study (1 laser, 1 control, 2
elected to have surgery to repair
wounds).
Healing rate was not equal under
the treatment conditions used.
There was a significant
difference in rate of healing
between the laser and US/UVC
groups. There was no significant
difference between the control
group and the other 2 groups.
Laser treatment had no benefit
for wound healing in SCI
patients. Three patients showed
deterioration, judged by an
increase in ulcer size.
Deterioration was also recorded
for 1 control group patient and
one US/UVC patient.
Authors point out a limitation of
this study; it did not compare
outcomes of combining wound
care with placebo US or laser
treatment. Because the US/UV
regimen involves daily treatment,
a placebo effect should be
considered in further work, and
the combined regimen should be
compared with either UVC or US.
As well, these methods need to
be tested on other patient
populations and should be
extended to a larger number of
patients in a placebo-controlled
trial.
Fair level of scientific evidence,
small patient sample and
uncontrolled variables.
Shuttleworth et al. (28)
Prospective
comparative study of
laser and conventional
wound therapies
(non-randomized)
1997
n=14
Age: 76.3 y
Control group: n=8, 1 diabetic
patient
Laser group: n=6, 2 diabetic
patients. (Three patients
ultimately received both laser
and conventional treatment
during the trial.)
Leg ulcers caused by a variety of
conditions.
Study period: 15 wks/patient
Control group: Conventional wound
care and dressings in accordance
with the local wound management
policy. [On ethical grounds patients
could not be restricted to only one
treatment method.]
Laser group: Each laser therapy
session was a maximum of 4 min.
using a 46-cluster probe and 2
sources of low-power laser: HeNe at
632.8 nm and infrared laser at 904
nm, 4 J/cm2
. Patients received
treatment and dressings twice a
week.
Control group: All patients
showed improvement.
Laser group: Three patients
showed improvement or healed
and three deteriorated.
The results of this study neither
support nor refute the use of lowpower laser therapy in wound
management. Further studies
should incorporate a larger
sample size and actively control
or eliminate variables such as
the size of wounds.
Laser therapy should not be
recommended for use in routine
wound treatment until more
specific evidence is available.
Fair to poor level of scientific
evidence, very small patient
sample.
7
Table 2: Studies of LLLT on open wounds, con’t
Study Patient characteristics Therapy Outcomes Comments
Landau (20)
Non-controlled clinical
series
1998
n=50 (patients had chronic
diabetic foot ulcers and had not
responded to conventional
therapy)
Age: 59 y ( 11 y)
Diabetes:
Type 1: 14
Type 2: 36
Ulcer duration: 9 6.6 mo
Range: 2 - 70 mo
All patients continued their
medications and antibiotic
treatment was administered
according to the sensitivity of the
microorganism.
HBO group: 15 patients
HBO and Laser group: 35 patients
Unilaser Scan 60, 2 sources of laser:
HeNe at 632.8 nm and infrared
laser at 904 nm, 4 J/cm2
.
Treatment: HBO-2.5 h, laser 20 min,
2 – 3 X per week
No of treatments: 25 13
Range:7 – 70
Duration: 3 1.8 mo
Range: 1 – 8
Complete recovery: 43
Failure: 7
There was no significant
difference between groups.
Authors state that topical
hyperbaric oxygen alone or
combined with a low level energy
laser for the treatment of patients
with chronic diabetic foot ulcers
were valuable adjuvants to
conventional therapy.
Poor level of scientific evidence
Gupta et al. (15)
Double-blind, placebocontrolled study
1998
n=9
(12 venous ulcers)
Control group
Age: 64.7( 9.4 y)
Ulcer duration: 36.0 21.6 wks
Intervention group
Age: 61.0( 7.8 y)
Ulcer duration: 105.8 36.0 wks
Control group: placebo treatment
received sham therapy from
identical-appearing light sources,
from the same delivery system.
Intervention group: Two
monochromatic optical sources:
one (red-light) source-660 nm used
over ulcer for 180s.
second (infrared) source-880 nm
used on periphery of ulcer for 30s.
Trtmts were 3X/wk, for 10 wks.
Configuration used gave optimum
coverage over wound areas.
Unhealed ulcers in control group:
84.7%. Decrease in ulcer area
(compared to baseline):
14.7 mm2
. One patient dropped
out of the study after 3 wks.
Unhealed ulcers in intervention
group: 24.4%. Decrease in ulcer
area (compared to baseline):
193.0 mm2
.
A randomization bias was found
toward the placebo group, ulcers
were of a significantly shorter
duration.
There were no adverse effects.
Authors state that despite the
bias LEPT was an effective
modality for the treatment of
venous leg ulcers.
Fair level of scientific evidence,
very small patient sample.
HBO=hyperbaric oxygen HeNe=helium neon = wavelength US=ultrasound UVC=ultraviolet-C
SATA=spacial average-temporal average * Jovell and Navarro-Rubio, reference 16
8
Telfer et al. (30) completed their pilot study in order to more precisely define
technical characteristics of low energy photon therapy to be used in a future
placebo-controlled, double-blind study. This study was later completed and is
included in Table 2 (15)
.
Gogia et al. (14) state that it is the favourable results in animal studies that have
prompted researchers to try LLLT on humans. They point out that this logic fails
when the type of wound is considered; a surgically-induced lesion versus a
pressure sore. The healing process for these two types of wounds is very
different and cannot be compared. They suggest the need to establish the laser
parameters to produce optimal benefit and that guidelines are needed to
establish treatment frequency.
Nussbaum et al. (24) affirm that evaluation of different approaches to wound
healing is complicated by the heterogeneous nature of the population of patients
who have chronic wounds.
In the article by Shuttleworth and Banfield (28) the laser type is not specified and
the dressings are not described. Hence comparison with other studies is difficult.
The authors suggest that the marked improvement in the control group may be
partly explained by the Hawthorne effect whereby inclusion of individuals in a
study can promote the desired outcome. However, one would expect the newer
laser treatment to be influenced by this variable rather than the control
treatment.
In the Landau study the topical oxygen was applied to the wounds by pumping
oxygen into a disposable polyethylene bag 100 cm long and 60 cm wide. The bag
was sealed on the open end by an elastic bandage. The benefit of topical oxygen
or topical oxygen combined with laser treatment cannot be confirmed, as there
was no comparison with conventional therapy. As well, topical use of oxygen,
outside a hyperbaric oxygen (HBO) chamber, does not affect oxygen tension past
the depth of the superficial dermis (25). While the Landau study refers to topical
oxygen treatment as “HBO”, true HBO therapy places the patient in a
pressurized, pure oxygen environment and follows a specific and wellestablished protocol (Searles, personal communication).
The paper by Gupta et al. had the potential to provide a good level of scientific
evidence about efficacy of laser therapy as it outlined a study that was
randomized, double-blind and placebo-controlled. However, the patient
numbers were very small.
None of these studies establish the efficacy of the technique.
9
Other evidence of effectiveness
Information collected by the Physical Therapy Department at the University of
Delaware discusses both evidence of effectiveness and lack of effectiveness of
laser therapy in accelerating wound healing. The Department reports that much
of the evidence of effectiveness has been shown in animal studies. As well they
stated that in spite of the large number of studies that dismissed lasers as a
wound-healing tool, many patients and clinicians attested to its effectiveness (19,
31). The lack of evidence of effectiveness of LLLT for wound healing is at least in
part associated with problems with research, including experimental design
flaws, and use of heterogeneous and inappropriate subject populations.
Treatment parameters are not consistently reported in the literature and that
severely limits the ability to compare studies. In addition, studies have
incomplete procedural descriptions, flawed methodology, limited blinding and,
at times, non-existent controls. Before definitive conclusions about the efficacy of
LLLT can be drawn, appropriate laser wavelengths, dosage schedules, and
conditions to be treated must be tested and established with clinical research (28,
31, 33)
.
A postal survey of physical therapists in Flanders ranked LLLT in first place for
treatment of wounds (5). Yet, only 30% of the respondents considered the use of
LLLT to be well founded on research. Additionally, 70% thought that neither the
efficacy of laser therapy nor the required treatment protocols were sufficiently
backed by scientific research. Comments from more than 90% of the respondents
said patients were prejudiced when receiving LLLT. Their hope for better results
with a „high-tech and modern‟ therapy, were preconceived opinions that were
quoted and likely contributed to their wound-healing success (5)
.
A further study identified, but not included in Table 2, is that by Kleinman et al.
(19) who report experience with 42 patients who had venous ulcers for more than
6 months. Complete wound closure occurred in 86% of patients, which was
attributed to the biostimulating effect of laser therapy. However, the level of
scientific evidence is poor. There is no control group, the period of the study was
28 years and no individual patient results were reported.
The scientific literature is sparse and available articles report only weak evidence
of the ability of LLLT to accelerate wound healing. Moreover, any alternative
therapy promoted as an adjunct to conventional therapy might be compared to
other, possibly more effective, interventions - an example being electrical
stimulation (1)
.
10
Wound classification
Use of LLLT needs to be considered in the context of other standard approaches to
wound healing. Within this report „wound‟ describes either a venous stasis ulcer or
a pressure ulcer/sore. A large proportion of these types of wounds is located on the
lower leg.
Wounds can be acute, as in the case of surgery, or chronic. In a healthy individual
with no underlying factors, such as diabetes or venous disease, an acute wound
should heal within 3 to 6 weeks. Chronic wounds are defined as those which have
not proceeded though an orderly and timely process to produce anatomic and
functional integrity, or proceeded through the repair process (Figure 1) without
establishing a sustained anatomic and functional result (9, 18). As well, chronic
wounds heal by different mechanisms depending on their cause. Pressure sores, for
example, heal by a combination of angiogenesis, deposition of extracellular matrix
and wound contraction. Venous stasis ulcers are typically relatively shallow and
heal primarily by re-epithelialization (Figure 1) (6, 9)
.
Demands created by chronic wounds are a continuing medical and socioeconomic
problem. Correction of the underlying pathophysiology is frequently not possible.
The benefits of current technologies are limited and costs have been substantial. It is
for these reasons that the clinical and scientific arenas have turned to alternative
therapies in an effort to promote and speed the healing process (1, 9, 27)
.
The flowchart in Figure 1 outlines five discrete steps in the wound healing process.
„Re-epithelialization‟ has been highlighted to emphasize that some wounds halt here
and become chronic, i.e. new epithelial cells do not grow and close over the wound
(Searles, personal communication). It should be noted that some descriptions in
studies combine stages of the wound healing process (6, 17, 18, 29, 31)
.
Conventional therapy
The efficient management of wounds requires a multidisciplinary team made up of
physicians, clinical nurse practitioners, dieticians, social workers, occupational and
physical therapists (12, 18, 26). The main treatment goal is rapid wound closure
followed by a functional and aesthetically satisfactory scar (29). Conventional wound
therapy involves two basic principles; 1) identify and control the underlying causes,
and 2) provide an environment for moist interactive wound healing (dressings) (1, 6,
18, 27). Characteristics of wound dressings are outlined in Appendix B.
There are improved healing rates in venous ulcers when compression therapy (see
Appendix C) is used. Pressure ulcers will not heal if the patient does not pressure
download the site. Compression therapy should be considered part of the standard
of care in this patient population (Searles, personal communication).
11
Figure 1: Phases in the wound healing process
Hemostasis
lasts several minutes
disruption of blood vessels
results in initiation of coagulation cascade
cell migration into wound
Inflammatory phase
lasts several days
vasodilation
increased capillary permeability
complement activation
triggers neutrophils and macrophage migration into wound
macrophage play pivotal role in transition from inflammation to wound repair
platelets release platelet-derived growth factor (a potent chemo-attractant for
fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells)
Granulation
Lasts up to 3 weeks in an acute wound
Simultaneous events that occur in this phase:
fibroplasia
matrix deposition
angiogenesis
Re-epithelialization [Most chronic wounds halt at this stage of the
healing process]
basement membrane proteins reappear in a very ordered sequence from the
margin of the wound inward in a zipper-like fashion closing the epidermal
defect. Chronic wounds typically do not make it to this stage, i.e. granulation
may occur but epithelial cells do not migrate over and close the wound.
Wound contraction and tissue remodeling
occurs over 6 to 18 months
growth factors and other peptides provide stimuli for wound contraction
cellular components and extracellular matrix of the wound gradually and
continually changing
Sources: (6, 17, 18, 29, 31)
12
Current wound management practices in Alberta
In Alberta the Calgary Regional Health Authority (CRHA) has developed a clinical
pathway for wound healing. The pathway was designed by a multidisciplinary
team and is meant as a guide for health care professionals who treat patients with
acute or chronic wounds. The Capital Health Authority (CHA) developed a
Regional Wound Care Guideline for use by health care professionals (26). Like the
CRHA, the CHA used a multidisciplinary team to produce their Guideline.
Both health authorities treat wounds using conventional therapy. However, they do
mention alternative therapies in their literature. The S.W.A.T. (skin & wound
assessment and treatment) Team of the CRHA uses the text Chronic Wound Care (13)
as a guide for instruction on the use of alternative therapies. This publication states
that clinical safety and efficacy of LLLT has not been established. Further controlled
clinical studies on large numbers of patients are needed to confirm the clinical
efficacy of low intensity lasers on wound healing. Low intensity laser therapy
should only be used as an adjunct treatment to conventional wound care (13)
.
The CHA mentions adjunctive therapies such as HBO, laser, ultrasound, and
electrical stimulation. The CHA quotes the AHCPR‟s clinical practice guideline
stating that it is the responsibility of users to ensure they are using a modality with
demonstrated efficacy through clinical research, and that the user has the
appropriate training to apply that modality. Physiotherapists should attempt to
advance the clinical management of wounds via further trials and research of these
modalities (1, 26)
.
Suggested information needs for Alberta
It is not clear from previous published studies that LLLT is effective in accelerating
the wound healing process. The current scientific evidence provides only very weak
support for the use of this therapy and all studies suggest that further work is
needed. At this time, available evidence does not justify use of LLLT. It is
suggested that any further use in Alberta should be informed by the results of local
empirical studies.
If local studies are to be established, the following stages should be addressed:
Agreement on protocol. This should be well defined so that each centre
participating in the study has an established protocol.
Patient selection. Current scientific literature describes use of LLLT in
heterogeneous populations of patients that do not allow comparisons between
groups. Patient selection would require strict inclusion/exclusion criteria, welldefined outcomes (healed ulcers), and length of follow-up.
13
Study design. Evidence of efficacy should be obtained through one or more
RCTs.
A study of this sort would present a challenge but without it a definitive answer
regarding the efficacy of LLLT in accelerating wound healing is unavailable and use
of the technology in routine health care cannot be justified. A local study might
incorporate methodology like that described by Gupta et al. (15) and Nussbaum et al.
(24) and would include representative patient populations in Alberta.
Characteristics of such a study might include:
Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial (preferably multi-centre).
Objective: to evaluate the efficacy of LLLT in the treatment of chronic venous leg
ulcers in a home care population. This would require approval from ethics
review boards and informed consent as outlined by Health Canada regulations.
Hypothesis: LLLT, used as an adjunct to conventional therapy, will accelerate the
wound healing process. This might be addressed by comparing the control
group (conventional wound care plus (placebo) sham LLLT) with the
intervention group (conventional therapy plus LLLT).
Follow-up:
Measure the time taken until the defined outcome is reached, in both arms of
study.
Study group: those with chronic venous leg ulcers as determined by specific
diagnostic criteria.
Patient numbers:
Number of subjects per group would be determined with respect to expected
percent change in the intervention group. If 40% of wounds heal with optimal
therapy and laser therapy is expected to make a 25% improvement, then
approximately 61 participants are needed per group. If the improvement is more
modest, for example 15%, then the sample sizes will be much larger and in the
order of 173 participants per group (Hessel, Searles, personal communications).
Treatment protocol:
Laser type and a well-defined protocol to be determined.
Inclusion: patients aged 50y with chronic venous leg ulcers; (ulcers of greater
than 3 months duration, and unresponsive to conventional therapy).
Exclusion: those with peripheral arterial disease, haematologic abnormalities,
vasculitis, history of epilepsy, those receiving topical steroids around wound site,
those receiving anticoagulant therapy, those receiving drugs known to cause
photo-sensitivity reactions.
14
While such information would be needed to address the question of efficacy of
LLLT, a further policy issue to be addressed is whether other alternative therapies
for wound healing might require consideration. For example, the AHCPR clinical
guideline number 15 (1) recommends a course of electrical stimulation for recalcitrant
wounds. Given the status of that technology, use of a modality such as LLLT that
has unproven efficacy becomes difficult to justify.
Finally, any findings need to be integrated into the broader strategies used for
effective management of wounds.
In conclusion:
The benefits of low level laser therapy for wound healing are not established.
There is no good scientific evidence to support its use.
Any local use of LLLT in this application should be supported by empirical data
from good quality studies of its efficacy and effectiveness.
Other, possibly more promising alternative therapies should be considered as
adjunct therapies to conventional wound healing practices.
15
Appendix A: Methodology
Literature searches of the databases in the table below were made using the
terms shown. The first search included the MEDLINE, HealthSTAR, EMBASE;
Dissertation Abstracts and Current Contents databases using the Dialog
Corporation, OneSearch® option. This search was restricted to terms in the title
or descriptor field. The second search, on CINAHL, was accessed through OVID
Technologies. The Cochrane Library was also searched, and several searches
were run on the Internet using a variety of terms. With the exception of the
Cochrane Library and Internet searches, the literature searches were restricted to
the period 1993 – August, 1999.
Databases Keywords
MEDLINE
EMBASE
HealthSTAR
Dissertation
Abstracts
Online
Current
Contents
low level laser? or low power laser? or low intensity laser? or low
energy laser? or biostimulation or laser? therap? or lasers
therapeutic use
AND
wound healing or wounds or diabetic foot or skin diseases or leg
ulcer? or foot ulcer or diabetic ulcer? or decubitus ulcer or wound
care or skin necrosis or bedsores or pressure ulcer?
CINAHL laser or laser$ or biostimulation
AND
leg ulcer or pressure ulcer or skin care or surgical wound care or
wound$ or injuries or skin ulcer or wound healing or decubitus or
diabetic
Cochrane
Library
laser* and (wound or ulcer or ulcer or sore*)
Date Limits: 1993 – 1999, no date limits on Cochrane Library or Internet searches
Publication types and number of studies found (Table 2):
Randomized controlled clinical trials 2
Controlled clinical trials 1
Non-controlled clinical trials 2
Multicentre studies 0
Prospective comparative studies 1
Retrospective studies 0
16
Single case reports and animal studies were excluded.
Regulatory status should be considered before implementing or using any
therapeutic medical device. Standards published by the Canadian Standards
Association (CSA) or Underwriters‟ Laboratories (UL), are in place to ensure
electrical devices, including medical equipment, are safe against fire and shock.
However, it is not the mandate for these agencies to test efficacy or effectiveness
in any physiological way, rather that is the responsibility of the Health Protection
Branch in Canada and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the U.S.
Each was contacted with respect to low level laser regulatory status.
Jovell and Navarro-Rubio (16) published a classification scheme that comments
on quality of evidence. Assignment to categories is dependent on conditions of
scientific rigour. This scheme forms the basis of the classification of studies in
Table 2 into the following categories:
Good: Meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) or from
large sample RCTs;
Good to Fair: Small sample RCTs and non-randomized controlled prospective
trials;
Fair: Non-randomized controlled retrospective trials, cohort studies
and case-control studies;
Poor: Non-controlled clinical series and various other approaches.
In this health technology assessment:
Efficacy refers to the performance of a technology under „ideal‟ conditions or
conditions of best practice; and
Effectiveness refers to the performance of a technology under „routine‟
conditions. For example when it has become widely distributed in a health care
system.
17
Appendix B
Following is additional information regarding the staging of pressure sores and
classifying venous stasis ulcers.
Staging criteria for pressure sores
The following staging criteria are consistent with those of the National Pressure
Ulcer Advisory Panel (NPUAP, 1989) Consensus Development conference (1).
Stage I Nonblanchable erythema of intact skin; the heralding lesion of skin
ulceration. In dark-skinned individuals discoloration of the skin, warmth,
edema, or hardness may also be indicators.
Stage II: Partial thickness skin loss involving epidermis and/or dermis. The
ulcer is superficial and presents clinically as an abrasion, blister, or shallow
crater.
Stage III: Full thickness skin loss involving damage or necrosis of
subcutaneous tissue that may extend down to, but not through, underlying
fascia. The ulcer presents clinically as a deep crater with or without
undermining of adjacent tissue.
Stage IV: Full thickness skin loss with extensive destruction, tissue necrosis,
or damage to muscle, bone, or supporting structures (for example, tendon or
joint capsule). Undermining and sinus tracts may also be associated with
Stage IV pressure ulcers.
According to the Practice Guideline the staging definitions recognize the
following limitations:
Assessment of Stage I pressure ulcers may be difficult to perform in patients
with darkly pigmented skin.
When eschar (a scab) is present, accurate staging of the pressure ulcer is not
possible until the eschar has sloughed or the wound has been debrided.
Venous stasis ulcers
Although venous stasis ulcers may be staged using the pressure sore criteria the
following classification system is generally used (26).
Partial-thickness – skin loss involving the epidermis, dermis or both, a shallow
crater, blister, abrasion or skin tear.
Full-thickness – skin loss involving damage to or necrosis of the dermis and
epidermis, it may also affect subcutaneous tissue, muscle, tendon and bone.
Red/Yellow/Black (RYB) is another classification tool that assesses the wound
bed.
Red – clean and uniformly pink to red; often heal by secondary intention.
Dressings need to be changed less often, but should be moist at all times.
18
Yellow – varies from ivory to canary yellow or even green in colour, depending
on whether there is infection. The goal of care is to manage exudate and to
remove slough through enzymatic, autolytic or surgical debridement.
Black – ranging in colour from dark brown, gray to black. The goal for most
individuals is to remove the necrotic tissue by enzymatic, autolytic or surgical
debridement. Where there is no drainage or boggy surrounding tissue, hard, dry
eschar or black scab may be left intact on the lower legs, feet or heels of
individuals whose healing potential is compromised by inadequate circulation.
It provides a protective base for the wound.
If all three colours are present then treatment is aimed at the colour that is
present over 50% of the wound.
The majority of pressure ulcers can be prevented provided that a tool such as the
Braden Pressure Ulcer Risk Assessment is used for monitoring and intervening
with at-risk patients. Existing wounds should be continually monitored using a
guide such as the Bates Jensen Pressure Sore Status Tool (Orsted, Searles,
personal communications).
Additional information about wound characteristics
The AHCPR Clinical Practice Guideline #15, (1) makes recommendations for the
prediction, prevention and early treatment of pressure ulcers in adults. As well,
it provides grading or staging information. A pressure ulcer is defined as any
lesion or sore caused by unrelieved pressure that results in damage of
underlying tissue. Pressure ulcers typically occur over bony prominences and
are graded or staged by the amount of tissue damage that has occurred. The
same staging criteria can be used for venous stasis ulcers, which are lower
extremity ulcerations related to disruption in blood flow between the superficial
and deep venous system causing chronic venous insufficiency (26).
Additional information about wound dressings
The „ideal‟ wound dressing for treating pressure sores would (4, 6, 18):
allow excess exudate to be removed from the wound surface
provide a moist micro-environment
be sterile/contaminant free
not leave dressing material in the wound
reduce ulcer pain
be easy to change
not cause an allergic reaction
act as a semi-permeable membrane
cause no trauma when removed, be impermeable to micro-organisms
provide thermal insulation.
19
Semi-permeable and impermeable dressings should only be used on noninfected wounds.
A moist, pressure dressing maintains hemostasis of wound, prevents bleeding or
hematoma formation. As well, a pressure bandage keeps dead space collapsed,
again preventing a hematoma or seroma. The moist environment prevents
eschar (scab) formation. Eschars impede keratinocyte migration; they are
required to repopulate the wound surface. A wound may have to be debrided of
necrotic tissue that supports growth of pathological organisms. Next, the wound
is packed with wound dressing material to ensure that the wound heals bottom
up. Antibiotics are used either topically and/or systemically for treatment of
infection (1, 18, 26).
20
Appendix C
Alternative therapies
Alternative therapies, other than LLLT, purported to promote or accelerate
wound healing include electrical stimulation, hyperbaric oxygen therapy,
whirlpool, ultrasound, and compression therapy.
Electrical stimulation, to date, is the most promising alternative therapy used to
accelerate wound healing. The AHCPR‟s CPG for treatment of pressure sores
recommends a course of treatment with electrotherapy for Stage III and IV
pressure ulcers that have proved unresponsive to conventional therapy (1, 12,
13). The CPG was recently revisited by Ovington (25). This updated review
focused on dressings and adjunctive therapies. Based on findings in the current
literature it not only supported the 1994 CPG but stated that the strength-ofevidence had increased for use of electrical stimulation.
The study also supported the CPG stating that therapeutic use of hyperbaric
oxygen and ultrasound has not been sufficiently established to permit
recommendation of these therapies for the treatment of pressure ulcers (25).
In an overview of physical therapies used for wound management, whirlpool is
mentioned as a way to reduce the risk of infection as it removes dirt, debris,
foreign contaminants and loose necrotic tissue from the wound bed. However,
the effect of whirlpool on healing has not been studied (12, 13).
Ultrasound can be used both diagnostically to monitor the rate of healing and
therapeutically to stimulate the rate of wound healing (12). However, there is no
scientific evidence of effectiveness of ultrasound on the rate of wound healing
(25).
There is much scientific literature that supports compression therapy for venous
ulcers (8, 12, 13, 26, 27). It involves the deliberate application of pressure and is
most commonly employed to control edema and reduce swelling in the
treatment of venous disorders of the lower limb. Compression bandages have
been divided into four groups according to their ability to produce
predetermined levels of compression; light, moderate, high and extra high (8).
The National Clinical Guidelines recommended for use in Scotland mentions 24
RCTs of compression treatment for venous ulcers. Each demonstrated that
compression improves healing and should be used routinely (27).
21
References
1. Agency for Health Care Policy and Research. Treatment of pressure ulcers;
clinical guideline number 15. AHCPR Publication No.95-0652 1994;1-125.
2. Basford JR. Low intensity laser therapy: still not an established clinical tool.
Lasers in Surgery & Medicine 1995. 1995(16):331-42.
3. Bihari I, Mester AR. The biostimulative effect of low level laser therapy of
long-standing crural ulcers using helium neon laser, helium neon plus
infrared lasers, and noncoherent light: preliminary report of a randomized
double-blind comparative study. Laser Therapy 1989;1(2):97-8.
4. Bradley M, Nelson EA, Petticrew M, et al. Wound dressings for the
treatment of pressure sores (Protocol for a Cochrane Review). In The
Cochrane Library, Issue 2, 1999. Oxford:Update Software.
5. Cambier DC, Vanderstraeten G. Low-level laser therapy: The experience in
Flanders. European Journal of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation 1997(7):102-5.
6. Cho CY, Lo JS. Dressing the part. Dermatology Clinics 1998(16):25-47.
7. Crous L, Malherbe C. Laser and ultraviolet light irradiation in the
treatment of chronic ulcers. Physiotherapy 1988(44):73-7.
8. Cullum N, Roe B. Leg ulcers. January 1, 1995:1st edition. Scutari Projects,
Royal College of Nursing. Middlesex, U.K.
9. Falanga V. Special issue on wound healing: An overview. Journal of
Dermatologic Surgery & Oncology. 1993(19):689-90.
10. Flemming K, Cullum N. Laser therapy for the treatment of venous leg
ulcers (Cochrane Review). In The Cochrane Library, Issue 1, 1999. Oxford:
Update Software.
11. Galletti G. Low power laser therapy: a non-invasive highly effective
therapeutic modality. Laser Therapy 1997;9:131-36.
12. Gogia PP. Physical therapy modalities for wound management. Ostomy
Wound Management 1996;42(1):46-8.
13. Gogia PP. Physical therapy intervention in wound management. In: Chronic
Wound Care 2nd ed. Wayne, PA: Health Management Publications, Inc.
1997:251-59.
14. Gogia PP, Marquez RR. Effects of helium-neon laser on wound healing.
Ostomy Wound Management 1992;38(6):38-41.
15. Gupta AK, Filonenko N, Salansky N, et al. The use of low energy photon
therapy (LEPT) in venous leg ulcers: a double-blind, placebo-controlled
study. Dermatologic Surgery 1998;24(12):1383-86.
22
16. Jovell AJ, Navarro-Rubio MD. Evaluacion de la evidencia cientifica.
Medicina Clinica 1995(105):740-43.
17. Kane D, Krasner D. Wound healing and wound management. In: Chronic
Wound Care 2nd ed. Wayne, PA: Health Management Publications, Inc.
1997:1-4.
18. Keast DH, Orsted H. The basic principles of wound care. Ostomy Wound
Management 1998;44(8):24-31.
19. Kleinman Y, Simmer S, Braksma Y, et al. Low level laser therapy in patients
with venous ulcers: early and long-term outcome. Laser Therapy 1996(8):205-
8.
20. Landau Z. Topical hyperbaric oxygen and low energy laser for the
treatment of diabetic foot ulcers. Archives of Orthopaedic & Trauma Surgery
1998(117):156-58.
21. Lundeberg T, Malm M. Low-power HeNe laser treatment of venous leg
ulcers. Annals of Plastic Surgery 1991:27(6):537-39.
22. Malm M, Lundeberg T. Effect of low power gallium arsenide laser on
healing of venous ulcers. Scandinavian Journal of Plastic & Reconstructive
Surgery & Hand Surgery 1991;25(3):249-51.
23. Mitton C, Hailey D. Hyperbaric oxygen treatment in Alberta. Edmonton.
Alberta Heritage Foundation for Medical Research, April 1998.
24. Nussbaum EL, Biemann I, Mustard B. Comparison of
ultrasound/ultraviolet-C and laser for treatment of pressure ulcers in
patients with spinal cord injury. Physical Therapy 1994(74):812-23.
25. Ovington LG. Dressings and adjunctive therapies: AHCPR Guidelines
Revisited. Ostomy Wound Management 1999;45(1A (Suppl)):94S-106S.
26. Regional Wound Care Guidelines Working Group CHA. Regional wound
care guidelines. Edmonton. Capital Health Authority, 1998.
27. Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network (SIGN). The care of patients
with chronic leg ulcer. A National Clinical Guideline 1998. Edinburgh, U.K.
SIGN Secretariat, Royal College of Physicians.
28. Shuttleworth E, Banfield K. Wound care. light relief, low-power laser
therapy. Nursing Times 1997(93):74-78.
29. Singer AJ, Clark RAF. Cutaneous wound healing. New England Journal of
Medicine 1999;341(10):738-46.
30. Telfer J, Filonenko N, Salansky N. Low energy laser therapy for leg ulcers
[Abstract]. Lasers in Surgery & Medicine. 1993.
31. University of Delaware PTGs. Lasers and physical therapy care.
http://copland.udel.edu/~17179/index1.htm August 1, 1999.
23
32. Webb C, Dyson M, Lewis WH. Stimulatory effect of 660 nm low level laser
energy on hypertrophic scar-derived fibroblasts: possible mechanisms for
increase in cell counts. Lasers in Surgery and Medicine 1998(22):294-301.
33. Wheeland RG. Lasers for the stimulation or inhibition of wound healing.
Journal of Dermatologic Surgery & Oncology 1993(19):747-52.