Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review)
Dumville JC, O’Meara S, Deshpande S, Speak K
This is a reprint of a Cochrane review, prepared and maintained by The Cochrane Collaboration and published in The Cochrane Library
2013, Issue 7
http://www.thecochranelibrary.com
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review)
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
T A B L E O F C O N T E N T S
HEADER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
ABSTRACT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
PLAIN LANGUAGE SUMMARY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS FOR THE MAIN COMPARISON . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
BACKGROUND . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
OBJECTIVES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
METHODS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
RESULTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Figure 1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Figure 2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
ADDITIONAL SUMMARY OF FINDINGS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
DISCUSSION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
AUTHORS’ CONCLUSIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
REFERENCES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
CHARACTERISTICS OF STUDIES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
DATA AND ANALYSES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
Analysis 1.1. Comparison 1 Hydrogel dressing compared with larval therapy, Outcome 1 Number of ulcers healed. . 43
Analysis 2.1. Comparison 2 Hydrogel dressing compared with platelet-derived growth factor, Outcome 1 Number of ulcers
healed. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Analysis 3.1. Comparison 3 Hydrogel dressing compared with basic wound contact dressing, Outcome 1 Number of ulcers
healed. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
Analysis 3.2. Comparison 3 Hydrogel dressing compared with basic wound contact dressing, Outcome 2 Adverse events. 44
Analysis 3.3. Comparison 3 Hydrogel dressing compared with basic wound contact dressing, Outcome 3 Quality of life. 45
ADDITIONAL TABLES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
APPENDICES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
WHAT’S NEW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
CONTRIBUTIONS OF AUTHORS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
DECLARATIONS OF INTEREST . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
SOURCES OF SUPPORT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
INDEX TERMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) i
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
[Intervention Review]
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers
Jo C Dumville1
, Susan O’Meara2
, Sohan Deshpande3
, Katharine Speak4
1Department of Nursing, Midwifery and Social Work, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. 2Department of Health Sciences,
University of York, York, UK. 3Kleijnen Systematic Reviews, York, UK. 4York, UK
Contact address: Jo C Dumville, Department of Nursing, Midwifery and Social Work, University of Manchester, Manchester, M13
9PL, UK. jo.dumville@manchester.ac.uk.
Editorial group: Cochrane Wounds Group.
Publication status and date: New search for studies and content updated (no change to conclusions), published in Issue 7, 2013.
Review content assessed as up-to-date: 26 April 2013.
Citation: Dumville JC, O’Meara S, Deshpande S, Speak K. Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews 2013, Issue 7. Art. No.: CD009101. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD009101.pub3.
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
A B S T R A C T
Background
Foot ulcers in people with diabetes are a prevalent and serious global health issue. Dressings form a key part of ulcer treatment, with
clinicians and patients having many different types to choose from including hydrogel dressings. A clear and current overview of current
evidence is required to facilitate decision-making regarding dressing use.
Objectives
To assess the effects of hydrogel wound dressings compared with alternative dressings or none on the healing of foot ulcers in people
with diabetes.
Search methods
For this first update, in April 2013, we searched the following databases the Cochrane Wounds Group Specialised Register; The
Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) (The Cochrane Library); Ovid MEDLINE; Ovid MEDLINE (In-Process
& Other Non-Indexed Citations); Ovid EMBASE; and EBSCO CINAHL. There were no restrictions based on language or date of
publication.
Selection criteria
Published or unpublished randomised controlled trials (RCTs) that have compared the effects on ulcer healing of hydrogel with
alternative wound dressings or no dressing in the treatment of foot ulcers in people with diabetes.
Data collection and analysis
Two review authors independently performed study selection, risk of bias assessment and data extraction.
Main results
We included five studies (446 participants) in this review. Meta analysis of three studies comparing hydrogel dressings with basic wound
contract dressings found significantly greater healing with hydrogel: risk ratio (RR) 1.80, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.27 to 2.56.
The three pooled studies had different follow-up times (12 weeks, 16 weeks and 20 weeks) and also evaluated ulcers of different severities
(grade 3 and 4; grade 2 and grade unspecified). One study compared a hydrogel dressing with larval therapy and found no statistically
significant difference in the number of ulcers healed and another found no statistically significant difference in healing between hydrogel
and platelet-derived growth factor. There was also no statistically significant difference in number of healed ulcers between two different
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 1
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
brands of hydrogel dressing. All included studies were small and at unclear risk of bias and there was some clinical heterogeneity with
studies including different ulcer grades. No included studies compared hydrogel with other advanced wound dressings.
Authors’ conclusions
There is some evidence to suggest that hydrogel dressings are more effective in healing (lower grade) diabetic foot ulcers than basic
wound contact dressings however this finding is uncertain due to risk of bias in the original studies. There is currently no research
evidence to suggest that hydrogel is more effective than larval therapy or platelet-derived growth factors in healing diabetic foot ulcers,
nor that one brand of hydrogel is more effective than another in ulcer healing. No RCTs comparing hydrogel dressings with other
advanced dressing types were found.
P L A I N L A N G U A G E S U M M A R Y
Hydrogel dressings to promote diabetic foot ulcer healing
Diabetes, a condition which leads to high blood glucose concentrations, is a common condition with around 2.8 million people affected
in the UK (approximately 3% of the population). Dressings are a widely used treatment when caring for foot ulcers in people with
diabetes. There are many types of dressings that can be used, which also vary considerably in cost. This review (five studies involving a
total of 446 people) suggests that hydrogel dressings may be more effective than basic wound contact dressings in healing foot ulcers
in people with diabetes although the original research may be biased. There is insufficient research comparing hydrogel with advanced
dressing types to allow conclusions to be drawn regarding relative effectiveness in terms of ulcer healing.
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 2
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
S U M M A R Y O F F I N D I N G S F O R T H E M A I N C O M P A R I S O N [Explanation]
Hydrogel dressings compared to basic wound contact dressings for foot ulcers in people with diabetes
Patient or population: patients with foot ulcers in people with diabetes
Settings:
Intervention: Hydrogel dressings
Comparison: basic wound contact dressings
Outcomes Illustrative comparative risks* (95% CI) Relative effect
(95% CI)
No of Participants
(studies)
Quality of the evidence
(GRADE)
Comments
Assumed risk Corresponding risk
Basic wound contact
dressings
Hydrogel dressings
Number of ulcers healed
Follow-up: mean 16
weeks
Low risk of healing
1 RR 1.80
(1.27 to 2.56)
198
(3 studies)
⊕⊕⊕

moderate
2,3
340 per 1000 612 per 1000
(432 to 870)
Moderate risk of healing
1
530 per 1000 954 per 1000
(673 to 1000)
High risk of healing
1
650 per 1000 1000 per 1000
(825 to 1000)
Adverse events
Follow-up: mean 16
weeks
Study population Not estimable 0
(3 studies)
See comment Some adverse event data
were reported, however,
lack of methodological
detail about reporting and
type of data presented
3prevent further comment
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review)
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
See comment See comment
Moderate
*The basis for the assumed risk (e.g. the median control group risk across studies) is provided in footnotes. The corresponding risk (and its 95% confidence interval) is based on the
assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative effect of the intervention (and its 95% CI).
CI: Confidence interval; RR: Risk ratio;
GRADE Working Group grades of evidence
High quality: Further research is very unlikely to change our confidence in the estimate of effect.
Moderate quality: Further research is likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate.
Low quality: Further research is very likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and is likely to change the estimate.
Very low quality: We are very uncertain about the estimate.
1 Baseline risk of healing obtained from external source in which data from 27,630 patients with a diabetic neuropathic foot ulcer was
used to develop a simple prognostic model to predict likelihood of ulcer healing (Margolis DJ, Allen-Taylor L, Hoffstad O, Berlin JA.
Diabetic neuropathic foot ulcers: predicting which ones will not heal. Am J Med. 2003;115:627-31). It is important to note that given
an outcome of ulcer healing, low risk refers to a low risk of healing and thus reflects the most severe patient populations. Conversely
high risk refers to a high risk of healing.
2 Many of the risk of bias domains were unclear limiting judgements that could be made.
3 The confidence interval around the estimate of relative risk is consistent with a 27% relative increase in healing with hydrogel to a 256%
relative increase in healing with hydrogel.
4 Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review)
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
B A C K G R O U N D
Description of the condition
Diabetes, high glucose levels in the blood, is a common condition,
with around 2.8 million people affected in the UK (approximately
4.3% of the population) (Diabetes UK). Global projections suggest that the worldwide prevalence of diabetes is expected to rise
to 4.4% by 2030, meaning that approximately 366 million people
will be affected (Wild 2004).
Success in treating diabetes has improved the life expectancy of
patients. However, the increased prevalence of diabetes coupled
with the extended time people live with the disease has led to a
rise in the number of diabetes-related complications, such as neuropathy and peripheral arterial disease (PAD). It is estimated that
lower extremity disease is twice as common in people with diabetes
compared with people without (Gregg 2004). Both neuropathy
and PAD are risk factors for diabetic foot ulceration (Pecoraro
1990; Reiber 1999), which is a problem reported to affect 15%
or more of the diabetic population at some time in their lives.
(Reiber 1996; Singh 2005). Around 1% to 4% of people with
diabetes have foot ulcers at any given time (Abbott 2002; Kumar
1994). An ulcer forms as a result of damage to the epidermis and
subsequent loss of underlying tissue. Specifically, the International
Consensus on the Diabetic Foot defines a foot ulcer as a wound
extending through the full thickness of the skin below the level of
the ankle (Apelqvist 2000a). This is irrespective of duration and
the ulcer can extend to muscle, tendon and bone. The Wagner
wound classification system is well established and widely used for
grading diabetic foot ulcers. The system assesses ulcer depth and
the presence of osteomyelitis or gangrene in the following grades:
grade 0 (pre- or post-ulcerative lesion), grade 1 (partial/full thickness ulcer), grade 2 (probing to tendon or capsule), grade 3 (deep
with osteitis), grade 4 (partial foot gangrene) and grade 5 (whole
foot gangrene) (Wagner 1981). However, newer grading systems,
such as the PEDIS system (Schaper 2004) and the University of
Texas Wound Classification System (Oyibo 2001) have been developed.
PAD and neuropathy can occur separately (ischaemic foot and
neuropathic foot) or in combination (in the neuroischaemic foot).
The over-arching term ’diabetic neuropathy’ refers to a number of
neuropathic syndromes. Chronic distal sensorimotor symmetrical
neuropathy (abbreviated to distal symmetrical neuropathy) is the
most common, affecting around 28% of people with diabetes.
It can lead to ulceration through the following route(s) (Tesfaye
1996).
• Sympathetic autonomic neuropathy leads to decreased
sweating causing anhidrotic (dry) skin, which is prone to cracks
and fissures causing a break in the dermal barrier (Tesfaye 1996).
• Motor neuropathy causes wasting of the small, intrinsic
muscles of the foot by de-enervation. As the muscles waste they
cause retraction of the toes and lead to a subsequent deformity.
The abnormal foot shape can promote ulcer development due to
an increase in plantar pressures (Murray 1996).
• Sensory neuropathy results in impaired sensation, making
the patient unaware of potentially dangerous foreign bodies and
injuries.
People with diabetes-related foot ulceration are treated in a variety
of settings, for example community clinics, surgeries and their own
homes, by a variety of practitioners; this can make data collection
challenging. A UK study estimated that 2% of community-based
diabetic patients develop new foot ulcers each year (Abbott 2002).
In terms of healing, a meta-analysis of trials in which people with
neuropathic ulcers received good wound care reported that 24%
of ulcers attained complete healing by 12 weeks and 31% by 20
weeks (Margolis 1999). However, the risk of ulcer recurrence posthealing is high. Pound 2005 reported that 62% of ulcer patients
(n = 231) became ulcer-free at some stage over a 31-month observation period. However, of the ulcer-free group 40% went on
to develop a new or recurrent ulcer after a median of 126 days.
The ulcer recurrence rate over five years can be as high as 70%
(Dorresteijn 2010; Van Gils 1999).
Diabetic foot ulcers can seriously impact on an individual’s quality
of life and as many as 85% of foot-related amputations are preceded by ulceration (Apelqvist 2000b; Pecoraro 1990). Patients
with diabetes have a 10 to 20-fold higher risk of losing a lower
limb or part of a lower limb due to non-traumatic amputation
than those without diabetes (Morris 1998; Wrobel 2001).
Diabetic foot ulcers represent a major use of health resources, incurring costs not only for dressings applied, but also staff costs
(for podiatry, nurses, doctors), tests and investigations, antibiotics
and specialist footwear. Currie 1998 estimated the cost of healing
a foot ulcer in a patient with diabetes at around GBP 1451. Hospital admissions add further to the costs. Ten years ago the cost of
diabetic foot ulceration to the UK National Health Service was believed to be about GBP 12.9 million per year (Spencer 2000) and
this figure is likely to have increased significantly. The economic
impact is also high in terms of the personal costs to patients and
carers, for example costs associated with lost work time and productivity while the patient is non-weight bearing or hospitalised.
Description of the intervention
Broadly, the treatment of diabetic foot ulcers includes pressure relief (or off-loading) by resting the foot or wearing special footwear
or shoe inserts (or both); the removal of dead cellular material from
the surface of the wound (debridement or desloughing); infection
control; and the use of wound dressings. Other general strategies
in the treatment of diabetic foot ulcers include: patient education;
optimisation of blood glucose control; correction (where possible)
of arterial insufficiency; and surgical interventions (debridement,
drainage of pus, revascularisation, amputation).
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 5
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Dressings are widely used in wound care, both to protect the
wound and to promote healing. Classification of a dressing normally depends on the key material used. Several attributes of an
ideal wound dressing have been described (BNF 2010), including:
• the ability of the dressing to absorb and contain exudate
without leakage or strike-through;
• lack of particulate contaminants left in the wound by the
dressing;
• thermal insulation;
• permeability to water and bacteria;
• avoidance of wound trauma on dressing removal;
• frequency with which the dressing needs to be changed;
• provision of pain relief; and
• comfort.
There is a vast choice of dressings available to treat chronic wounds
such as diabetic foot ulcers. For ease of comparison this review has
categorised dressings according to the British National Formulary
2010 (BNF 2010) which is freely available via the internet. We
will use ’generic’ names where possible, also providing UK trade
names and manufacturers where these are available to allow crossreferencing with the BNF. However, it is important to note that
the way dressings are categorised as well as dressing names, manufacturers and distributors of dressings vary from country to country, so these are provided as a guide only. Below is a description
of all categories of dressings and includes the category of dressing
(hydrogel) which is the focus of this review:
Basic wound contact dressings
Low-adherence dressings and wound contact materials: usually
cotton pads which are placed directly in contact with the wound.
They can be either non-medicated (e.g. paraffin gauze dressing)
or medicated (e.g. containing povidone iodine or chlorhexidine).
Examples are paraffin gauze dressing, BP 1993 and Xeroform (Covidien) dressing - a non-adherent petrolatum blend with 3% bismuth tribromophenate on fine mesh gauze.
Absorbent dressings: applied directly to the wound or used as
secondary absorbent layers in the management of heavily exuding wounds. Examples include Primapore (Smith & Nephew),
Mepore (Mölnlycke) and absorbent cotton gauze (BP 1988).
Advanced wound dressings
Hydrogel sheet and amorphous dressings: consist of a crosslinked insoluable polymers (i.e. starch or carboxymethylcellulose)
and up to 96% water. These dressings are designed to absorb
wound exudate or rehydrate a wound depending on the wound
moisture levels. They are supplied in either flat sheets, an amorphous hydrogel or as beads. Examples are: ActiformCool (Activa)
and Aquaflo (Covidien).
Films - permeable film and membrane dressings: permeable to
water vapour and oxygen but not to water or microorganisms.
Examples are Tegaderm (3M) and Opsite (Smith & Nephew).
Soft polymer dressings: dressings composed of a soft silicone
polymer held in a non-adherent layer. They are moderately absorbent. Examples are: Mepitel (Mölnlycke) and Urgotul (Urgo).
Hydrocolloid dressings: are occlusive dressings usually composed
of a hydrocolloid matrix bonded onto a vapour-permeable film
or foam backing. When in contact with the wound surface this
matrix forms a gel to provide a moist environment. Examples
are: Granuflex (ConvaTec) and NU DERM (Systagenix). Fibrous
alternatives have been developed which resemble alginates and
are not occlusive but which are more absorbant than standard
hydrocolloid dressings: Aquacel (ConvaTec).
Foam dressings: normally contain hydrophilic polyurethane foam
and are designed to absorb wound exudate and maintain a moist
wound surface. There are various versions and some foam dressings that include additional absorbent materials, such as viscose
and acrylate fibres or particles of superabsorbent polyacrylate, or
which are silicone-coated for non-traumatic removal. Examples
are: Allevyn (Smith & Nephew), Biatain (Coloplast) and Tegaderm (3M).
Alginate dressings: highly absorbent and come in the form of
calcium alginate or calcium sodium alginate and can be combined
with collagen. The alginate forms a gel when in contact with the
wound surface which can be lifted off with dressing removal or
rinsed away with sterile saline. Bonding to a secondary viscose pad
increases absorbency. Examples are: Curasorb (Covidien), SeaSorb
(Coloplast) and Sorbsan (Unomedical).
Capillary-action dressings: consist of an absorbent core of hydrophilic fibres held between two low-adherent contact layers. Examples are: Advadraw (Advancis) and Vacutx (Protex).
Odour-absorbent dressings: dressings that contain charcoal and
are used to absorb wound odour. Often these types of wound
dressings are used in conjunction with a secondary dressing to
improve absorbency. Example: CarboFLEX (ConvaTec).
Antimicrobial dressings
Honey-impregnated dressings: contain medical-grade honey
which is proposed to have antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory
properties and can be used for acute or chronic wounds. Examples
are: Medihoney (Medihoney) and Activon Tulle (Advancis).
Iodine-impregnated dressings: release free iodine when exposed
to wound exudate, which is thought to act as a wound antiseptic.
An example is Iodozyme (Insense).
Silver-impregnated dressings: used to treat infected wounds as
silver ions are thought to have antimicrobial properties. Silver versions of most dressing types are available (e.g. silver foam, silver
hydrocolloid etc). Examples are: Acticoat (Smith & Nephew) and
Urgosorb Silver (Urgo).
Other antimicrobial dressings: these dressings are composed of
a gauze or low-adherent dressing impregnated with an ointment
thought to have antimicrobial properties. Examples are: chlorhexidine gauze dressing (Smith & Nephew) and Cutimed Sorbact
(BSN Medical).
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 6
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Specialist dressings
Protease-modulating matrix dressings: alter the activity of proteolytic enzymes in chronic wounds. Examples are: Promogran
(Systagenix) and Sorbion (H & R).
The diversity of dressings available to clinicians (including variation within each type listed above) makes evidence-based decisionmaking difficult when deciding the best treatment regimen for the
patient. In a UK survey undertaken to determine treatments used
for debriding diabetic foot ulcers, a diversity of treatments was reported (Smith 2003). It is possible that a similar scenario is true for
dressing choice. A survey of Diabetes Specialist Nurses found that
low/non-adherent dressings, hydrocolloids and alginate dressings
were the most popular for all wound types, despite a paucity of
evidence for either of these dressing types (Fiskin 1996). However,
several new dressing types have been made available and heavily
promoted in recent years. Some dressings now have an ’active’
ingredient such as silver that are promoted as dressing treatment
options to reduce infection and thus possibly also promote healing in this way. With increasingly sophisticated technology being
applied to wound care, practitioners need to know how effective
these often expensive dressings are compared with more traditional
dressings.
How the intervention might work
Animal experiments conducted over 40 years ago suggest that acute
wounds heal more quickly when their surface is kept moist, rather
than left to dry and scab (Winter 1963). A moist environment is
thought to provide optimal conditions for the cells involved in the
healing process as well as allowing autolytic debridement, which is
thought to be an important part of the healing pathway (Cardinal
2009). The desire to maintain a moist wound environment is a
key driver for the use of wound dressings. Different wound dressings vary in their level of absorbency so that a very wet wound can
be treated with an absorbent dressing (such as a foam dressing) to
draw excess moisture away from the wound to avoid skin damage,
whilst a drier wound can be treated with a more occlusive dressing
to maintain a moist environment. Hydrogels are insoluble polymers that bind together a relatively large volume of water. This
water can then be donated to wounds to maintain a moist environment. Additionally as the hydrogel polymer matrix is not fully
hydrated, it can also absorb some wound exudate with the aim of
optimising the moist level of the wound. When hydrogel material
is formed into a fixed structure via cross-linking of the polymers
it is considered a hydrogel sheet dressing.
Why it is important to do this review
Diabetic foot ulcers are a prevalent and serious global issue. Treatment with dressings forms a key part of the treatment pathway
when caring for diabetic foot ulcers and there are many types of
dressings that can be used, which also vary considerably in cost.
Guidelines for the treatment of diabetic ulcer (e.g. Steed 2006)
maintain that clinical judgement should be used to select a moist
wound dressing.
However, previous reviews of the evidence for wound dressings as
treatments for diabetic foot ulcers have not found evidence to support a specific dressing choice. Ten trials were eligible for inclusion
in a UK Health Technology Assessment review of wound dressings
published in 2000 (O’Meara 2000). The review included nine
trials that investigated a dressing or topical treatment for healing
diabetic foot ulcers. The review did not find any evidence to suggest that one dressing type was more or less effective in terms of
treating diabetic foot ulcers. The methodological quality of trials
was poor and all were small. Only one comparison was repeated in
more than one trial. A further systematic review conducted some
years ago reported similar findings (Mason 1999). A more recent
systematic review on the effectiveness of interventions to enhance
the healing of chronic ulcers of the foot (Hinchliffe 2008) (search
date December 2006) included only eight trials (randomised and
non-randomised) did not identify any evidence that one dressing
type was superior to another in terms of promoting ulcer healing.
A Cochrane Review of silver-based wound dressings and topical
agents for treating diabetic foot ulcers (Bergin 2006; search date
2010) did not find any studies that met its inclusion criteria. Finally, a review of antimicrobial treatments for diabetic foot ulcers
(Nelson 2006) included dressings and found that existing evidence
was too weak to recommend any antimicrobial product.
This review is part of a suite of Cochrane Reviews investigating
the use of dressings in the treatment of foot ulcers in people with
diabetes. Each review will focus on a particular dressing type which
in this review is the hydrogel dressing. These reviews will be summarised in an overview of reviews (Higgins 2009) which will draw
together all existing Cochrane Review evidence regarding the use of
dressings to treat foot ulcers in people with diabetes. Whilst other
existing review evidence may also be included in this overview,
following Cochrane guidance, this will only occur in the absence
of a relevant Cochrane intervention review (Higgins 2009).
O B J E C T I V E S
To assess the effects of hydrogel wound dressings compared with
alternative dressings or none on the healing of foot ulcers in people
with diabetes.
M E T H O D S
Criteria for considering studies for this review
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 7
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Types of studies
Published or unpublished randomised controlled trials (RCTs)
that evaluated the effects of any type of hydrogel wound dressing
in the treatment of diabetic foot ulcers, irrespective of publication
status or language.
Types of participants
Trials recruiting people with type I or type II diabetes, with an
open foot ulcer. Since study-specific classifications of ulcer diagnosis were likely to be too restrictive, we accepted study authors’
definitions of what was classed a diabetic foot ulcer. There was no
restriction in relation to the aetiology of the ulcer; trials recruiting
people with ulcers of neuropathic, ischaemic or neuroischaemic
causes were all eligible for inclusion.
We included participants of any age. We excluded trials which
included patients with a number of different wound aetiologies in
addition to diabetic foot ulcers (e.g. pressure ulcers, mixed arterial/
venous arterial) unless the results for the subgroup of patients with
a diabetic foot ulcer were reported separately or available from
authors on contact.
Types of interventions
The primary intervention was the hydrogel wound dressing (BNF
2010). We included any RCT in which the presence or absence
of a hydrogel dressing was the only systematic difference between
treatment groups. We anticipated that likely comparisons would
include hydrogel dressings compared with either a different hydrogel dressing or other dressing types and/or other interventions
(which could be non-dressing treatments, i.e. topical applications).
Types of outcome measures
Primary outcomes
• Time to ulcer healing.
• Number of ulcers completely healed within a specific time
period (we assumed that the period of time in which healing
occurred was the duration of the trial unless otherwise stated).
Secondary outcomes
• Health-related quality of life (measured using a
standardised generic questionnaire such as EQ-5D, SF-36, SF12 or SF-6 or disease-specific questionnaire). We did not include
ad-hoc measures of quality of life which are likely not to be
validated and would not be common to multiple trials.
• Number and level of amputations.
• Adverse events, including pain (measured using survey/
questionnaire/data capture process or visual analogue scale).
• Cost (including measurements of resource use such as
number of dressing changes and nurse time).
• Ulcer recurrence.
• Change in ulcer area expressed as absolute changes (e.g.
surface area changes in cm2
since baseline) or relative changes
(e.g. percentage change in area relative to baseline).
Search methods for identification of studies
For the search methods used in the original version of this review
see Appendix 1
Electronic searches
For this first update we searched the following databases in April
2013:
• The Cochrane Wounds Group Specialised Register
(searched 11 April 2013);
• The Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials
(CENTRAL) (The Cochrane Library 2013, Issue 3); Ovid
MEDLINE (1950 to March Week 4 2013);
• Ovid MEDLINE (In-Process & Other Non-Indexed
Citations, April 10, 2013);
• Ovid EMBASE (1980 to 2011 April 05);
• EBSCO CINAHL (1982 to 4 April 2013).
We searched the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials
(CENTRAL) using the following exploded MeSH headings and
keywords:
#1 MeSH descriptor Occlusive Dressings explode all trees
#2 MeSH descriptor Biological Dressings explode all trees
#3 MeSH descriptor Alginates explode all trees
#4 MeSH descriptor Hydrogels explode all trees
#5 MeSH descriptor Silver explode all trees
#6 MeSH descriptor Honey explode all trees
#7 (dressing* or alginate* or hydrogel* or “foam” or “bead” or
“film” or “films” or tulle or gauze or non-adherent or “non adherent” or silver or honey or matrix):ti,ab,kw
#8 (#1 OR #2 OR #3 OR #4 OR #5 OR #6 OR #7)
#9 MeSH descriptor Foot Ulcer explode all trees
#10 MeSH descriptor Diabetic Foot explode all trees
#11 diabet* NEAR/3 ulcer*:ti,ab,kw
#12 diabet* NEAR/3 (foot or feet):ti,ab,kw
#13 diabet* NEAR/3 wound*:ti,ab,kw
#14 (#9 OR #10 OR #11 OR #12 OR #13)
#15 (#8 AND #14)
We adapted this strategy to search Ovid MEDLINE, Ovid EMBASE and EBSCO CINAHL. We combined the Ovid MEDLINE search with the Cochrane Highly Sensitive Search Strategy
for identifying randomised trials in MEDLINE: sensitivity- and
precision-maximising version (2008 revision) (Lefebvre 2011).We
combined the EMBASE and CINAHL searches with the trial filters developed by the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network
(SIGN 2009). There were no restrictions on the basis of date or
language of publication.
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 8
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Searching other resources
In the original version of this review we attempted to contact researchers to obtain any unpublished data when needed. We also
searched the reference lists of the included studies and previous systematic reviews. We contacted appropriate manufacturers (Smith
& Nephew, Convatec Ltd, Mölnlycke Health Care, 3M Healthcare, Coloplast Ltd) for details of any unpublished studies.
Data collection and analysis
Selection of studies
Two review authors independently assessed the titles and abstracts
of retrieved studies for relevance. After this initial assessment, we
obtained all studiesfelt to be potentially relevant infull. Two review
authors then independently checked the full papers for eligibility,
with disagreements resolved by discussion and, where required,
the input of a third review author. We recorded all reasons for
exclusion.
Data extraction and management
We extracted and summarised details of the eligible studies using a
data extraction sheet. Two review authors extracted data independently and resolved disagreements by discussion. Where data were
missing from reports we attempted to contact the study authors
to obtain the missing information. We included studies published
in duplicate once but maximally extracted data. We extracted the
following data:
• country of origin;
• type of ulcer;
• unit of investigation (per patient) - single ulcer or foot or
patient or multiple ulcers on the same patient;
• care setting;
• number of participants randomised to each trial arm;
• eligibility criteria and key baseline participant data;
• details of the dressing/treatment regimen received by each
group;
• details of any co-interventions;
• primary and secondary outcome(s) (with definitions);
• outcome data for primary and secondary outcomes (by
group);
• duration of follow up;
• number of withdrawals (by group);
• adverse events, including amputation; and
• source of funding.
Assessment of risk of bias in included studies
Two review authors independently assessed each included study
using the Cochrane Collaboration tool for assessing risk of bias
(Higgins 2009). This tool addresses six specific domains, namely
sequence generation, allocation concealment, blinding, incomplete outcome data, selective outcome reporting and other issues
(e.g. extreme baseline imbalance, issues with unit of investigation)
(see Appendix 2 for details of the criteria on which the judgement
was based). We assessed blinding and completeness of outcome
data for each outcome separately. We completed a ’Risk of bias’ table for each eligible study. We resolved disagreements about risk of
bias assessment by discussion. Where a lack of reported information resulted in an unclear decision, where possible we contacted
authors for clarification.
We have presented our assessment of risk of bias findings using a
’Risk of bias’ summary figure, which presents all of the judgements
in a cross-tabulation of study by entry. This display of internal
validity indicates the weight the reader may give the results of each
study. We also aimed to present this assessment in the narrative
review.
We classified trials as being at high risk of bias if they are rated ’high’
for any of three key criteria (randomisation sequence, allocation
concealment and blinded outcome assessment).
Measures of treatment effect
Where possible, we present the outcome results for each trial with
95% confidence intervals (CI). We report estimates for dichotomous outcomes (e.g. ulcers healed during time period) as risk ratio
(RR). We used the RR rather than odds ratio (OR), since ORs
(when interpreted as RR) can give an inflated impression of the
effect size when event rates are high, as is the case for many trials
reporting healing of chronic wounds (Deeks 2002). We planned
to reported outcomes relating to continuous data (e.g. percentage
change in ulcer area) as mean difference (MD) and overall effect
size (with 95% CI calculated). Where a study reported time to
healing data (the probability of healing over a consecutive time
period) we planned to report and plot these data (where possible) using hazard ratio estimates. If studies reporting time-to-event
data (e.g. time to healing) did not report a hazard ratio or reported
these data incorrectly as a continuous variable then, where feasible, we planned to estimate this using other reported outcomes
such as the numbers of events through the application of available
statistical methods (Tierney 2007).
Unit of analysis issues
We recorded whether trials measured outcomes in relation to an
ulcer, a foot, a participant or whether multiple ulcers on the same
participant are studied. We also recorded where multiple ulcers on
a participant had been (incorrectly) treated as independent in a
study, rather than within-patient analysis methods being applied.
We have recorded this as part of the risk of bias assessment. Unless
otherwise, where the number of wounds appeared to equal the
number of participants we treated the ulcer as the unit of analysis
in this review.
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 9
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Dealing with missing data
Missing data are common in trial reports. Excluding participants
post-randomisation from the analysis or ignoring those participants lost to follow up can, in effect, compromise the process of
randomisation and thus potentially introduce bias into the trial. In
individual studies, where “proportion of ulcers healed data” were
presented, we assumed that where randomised participants were
not included in an analysis, their wound did not heal (that is, they
will be considered in the denominator but not the numerator).
Where a trial did not specify participant group numbers prior
to dropout, we planned to present only complete case data. We
planned to present data for time to healing, area change and for
all secondary outcomes as a complete case analysis.
Assessment of heterogeneity
We considered both clinical and statistical heterogeneity. Wherever appropriate, we pooled data using meta-analysis (conducted
using RevMan 5.1 (RevMan 2011)), that is where studies appeared
similar in terms of level of participants, intervention type and duration and outcome type. We assessed statistical heterogeneity using the Chi² test (a significance level of P < 0.1 was considered to
indicate heterogeneity) and the I² statistic (Higgins 2003). The I²
statistic examines the percentage of total variation across studies
due to heterogeneity rather than to chance. Values of I² over 50%
indicate a high level of heterogeneity. In the absence of clinical heterogeneity and in the presence of statistical heterogeneity (I² over
50%), we used a random-effects model. However, we did not pool
studies where heterogeneity was very high (I² over 50%). Where
there was no clinical or statistical heterogeneity we envisaged using
a fixed-effect model.
Data synthesis
We combined studies using a narrative overview with meta-analyses of outcome data where appropriate (in RevMan 5.1). The
decision to include studies in a meta-analysis depended on the
availability of treatment effect data and assessment of heterogeneity. For time-to-event data, we planned to plot log rank observed
minus expected events estimates using a fixed-effect model (a random-effects model is not available for this analysis in RevMan
5.1). Where relevant and possible we planned to conduct sensitivity analysis to investigate the potential impact of studies at high
risk of bias on pooled results.
R E S U L T S
Description of studies
See Characteristics of included studies; Characteristics of excluded
studies.
Results of the search
The systematic search yielded 346 abstracts which we screened
for potential inclusion in the review. Of these, we obtained 103
reports in full (for 84 studies) for a more detailed assessment and
five studies were eligible for inclusion in the review. No eligible
studies were obtained from the five commercial companies that
were contacted. We are not aware of any relevant on-going studies (checked ISRCTN register 25 April 2013). The update search
conducted in April 2013 yielded 116 citations of which two studies was obtained for further information: Turns 2012 (excluded)
and Wang 2012 (awaiting assessment as requires translation from
Chinese).
Included studies
We included five studies (446 participants) in this review (
D’Hemecourt 1998; Jensen 1998; Markevich 2000; Vandeputte
1997; Whalley 2001): a summary is presented in Table 1. One
study was single-centred (Jensen 1998) and three were multi-centred (D’Hemecourt 1998; Markevich 2000; Whalley 2001); the
remaining study did not detail the number of centres. Two studies
were undertaken in the USA (D’Hemecourt 1998; Jensen 1998);
one in Belgium (Vandeputte 1997) and one study was multi-national, taking place in Spain, UK, Lithuania and Belgium (Whalley
2001). Markevich 2000 did not detail country(ies) of conduct.
All studies were undertaken in adults with diabetes, with one
study including people with both type 1 or type 2 diabetes
(D’Hemecourt 1998). This study also included participants with
at least one ulcer of Wagner grade 3 or 4, where as Whalley 2001
included only ulcers that were Wagner grade 1 or 2 ulcers and
Jensen 1998 only included Wagner grade 2 ulcers. One study only
included participants with ulcers that were neuropathic (Whalley
2001). Vandeputte 1997 specified that it allowed entry to people
with infected non-neuropathic and sloughy ulcers whereas Jensen
1998 only included participants with no signs of ulcer infection,
and a documented blood supply consistent will the ability to heal
(no further information or measures provided). In general it seems
that a wide range of ulcer types were evaluated across these studies from potentially more complex wounds (D’Hemecourt 1998;
Vandeputte 1997) to potentially less complex (Jensen 1998). The
duration of trial follow up ranged from 10 days (Markevich 2000)
to 20 weeks (D’Hemecourt 1998), details presented in Table 1. Of
the five included studies, four were two-arm and one was threearm (D’Hemecourt 1998). All studies reported the number of ulcers healed. Mean time to healing was reported in Jensen 1998
and D’Hemecourt 1998 (summary estimate not provided). Adverse event reporting did not appear systematic in most studies
(potentially with the exception of D’Hemecourt 1998) although
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 10
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
this was difficult to assess, particularly for Markevich 2000 and
Whalley 2001 which were reported as conference abstracts only.
Excluded studies
We excluded 79 studies from the review (an additional exclude was
added from the update search). The main reasons for exclusion
were: the study was not randomised (n = 9), no single, identifiable
dressing type was evaluated (n = 11); another intervention, not a
dressing, differed between study groups (n = 26); the dressing(s)
evaluated were not hydrogel (n = 26). Another reason was recorded
for seven studies.
Risk of bias in included studies
We classified studies rated ’high risk’ for any of three key domains:
randomisation sequence, allocation concealment and blinded outcome assessment, as being at high risk of bias (Characteristics of
included studies; Figure 1; Figure 2). We rated all five studies as
being at unclear risk of bias due to poor reporting.
Figure 1. ’Risk of bias’ graph: review authors’ judgements about each risk of bias item presented as
percentages across all included studies.
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 11
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Figure 2. ’Risk of bias’ summary: review authors’ judgements about each risk of bias item for each included
study.
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 12
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Allocation
Adequacy of randomisation process
All five studies were described as “randomised”, however, none
reported the method used to generate randomisation sequence and
hence we judged all to be unclear for this domain.
Allocation concealment
None of the studies reported the allocation procedure such that
we could assess the degree of concealment and hence we judged
all trials to be unclear for this domain.
Blinding
Assessment of wound healing can be subjective and thus has the
potential to be influenced if the outcome assessor is aware of the
treatment allocation. In this review we focused on whether the
studies had conducted blinded outcome assessment. We judged
D’Hemecourt 1998 to be at low risk of bias and the other studies
to be unclear for this domain.
Incomplete outcome data
Whilst D’Hemecourt 1998 reported some trial loss to follow up
it stated that “analysis of efficacy was based on the intention to
treat population, which included patients who were randomised
to treatment, received at least one treatment and had any postbaseline data”. All numbers presented in the analysis matched the
number of participants randomised it was deemed that an intention-to-treat (ITT) analysis had been conducted and the study was
judged to be at low risk of bias for this domain. Jensen 1998 reported that five participants of 31(16%) were excluded post-randomisation; it seems that the authors conducted an ITT analysis
but this is not clear. Likewise the remaining studies did not report
enough information to make a judgement about ITT analysis and
so were classed as unclear.
Selective reporting
All studies reported outcomes adequately and we deemed them to
be at unclear or low risk of bias. However, it is important to note
that judgement for this domain may be of limited value given it
was made at face value based on the reporting of outcomes in the
results that were described in the methods. Study reports were not
compared to study protocols, which were not actively sought.
Other potential sources of bias
One study was funded by a commercial organisation (Jensen
1998). Funding for the remaining four studies was unclear. All
included studies reported no or limited baseline data thus the potential for imbalance was unclear.
Effects of interventions
See: Summary of findings for the main comparison Hydrogel
dressings compared to basic wound contact dressings for foot
ulcers in people with diabetes; Summary of findings 2 Hydrogel
dressings compared to Larval therapy for foot ulcers in people with
diabetes; Summary of findings 3 Hydrogel dressing compared
to platelet-derived growth factor for foot ulcers in people with
diabetes; Summary of findings 4 Purilon hydrogel compared to
Intrasite hydrogel for foot ulcers in people with diabetes
Dressing compared with non-dressing
Dressing compared with larval therapy
Comparison 1: hydrogel dressing compared with larval
therapy (one trial; 140 participants)
Markevich 2000 was a two-arm study with 140 participants that
compared a hydrogel dressing with the application of the larvae of
the green-bottle fly Lucilia sericata (larval therapy) (Table 1).
Primary outcome: ulcer healing
Markevich 2000 had a follow-up period of 10 days, suggesting
that the primary outcome was debridement rather than complete
healing (the study also measured number of wounds with granulation tissue covering 50% of the wound); explaining the low
numbers of healing events in this study. There was no statistically
significant difference in the number of ulcers healed in the hydrogel-dressed group (2/70; 3%) compared with the larval therapytreated group (5/70; 7%): risk ratio (RR) 0.40, 95% confidence
interval (CI) 0.08 to 1.99 (Analysis 1.1). The proportion of participants with more than a 50% reduction in wound area was 27% in
the hydrogel-dressed group and 51% in the larval therapy-treated
group (values and standard deviation (SD) not reported; attempts
to contact author unsuccessful).
Secondary outcomes: not reported
Summary: hydrogel dressing compared with larval therapy
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 13
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Limited data from one small study with a very short follow up
period found no difference in numbers of ulcers healed between
larval therapy-treated ulcers and hydrogel-dressed ulcers.
Dressing compared with platelet-derived growth factor
Comparison 2: hydrogel dressing compared with platelet-derived growth factor (one trial; 104 participants)
D’Hemecourt 1998 was a three-arm study (two groups relevant
to this comparison) with a maximum follow up of 20 weeks. The
two relevant arms contained 104 participants and compared a hydrogel dressing with a platelet-derived growth factor (becaplermin
gel, 100 µg/g). There was no statistically significant difference in
the number of ulcers healed in the hydrogel-dressed ulcers (25/
70; 36%) compared with the growth-factor-treated ulcers (15/34;
44%): RR 0.81, 95% CI 0.50 to 1.32 (Analysis 2.1).
Summary: hydrogel dressing compared with platelet-derived
growth factor
There was no statistically significant difference in healing between
ulcers treated with hydrogel and platelet-derived growth factors.
Dressing compared with dressing
Advanced wound dressing compared with basic wound
contact dressing
Comparison 3: hydrogel dressing compared with basic
wound contact dressing (three trials; 198 participants)
Three studies (D’Hemecourt 1998; Jensen 1998; Vandeputte
1997) compared a hydrogel with a basic wound contact dressing (Table 1). D’Hemecourt 1998 was a three-arm study, with
two arms relevant to this comparison that contained 138 participants and compared a hydrogel with a wet-to-moist saline dressing. Jensen 1998 was a two-arm study with 31 participants that
compared a hydrogel dressing with gauze pad soaked in sterile
saline. Vandeputte 1997 was a two-arm study with 29 participants
that compared a hydrogel dressing (elasto gel with 65% glycerol,
17.5% water and 17.5% polyacrylamide) with dry gauze.
Primary outcome: ulcer healing
D’Hemecourt 1998 had a maximum follow-up of 20 weeks . There
was no statistically significant difference in the number of ulcers
healed in the hydrogel-dressed group (25/70; 36%) compared with
the basic wound contact dressed group (15/68; 22%): RR 1.62,
95% CI 0.94 to 2.80 (Analysis 3.1). This study undertook blinded
outcome assessment. Additionally, whilst 41 (24%) of study participants were reported as withdrawn, the report confirms that
the intention-to-treat population was the primary population for
analysis.
Jensen 1998 had a maximum follow-up of 16 weeks. Significantly
more ulcers healed in the hydrogel-dressed group (11/14; 79%)
compared with the basic wound contact dressed-group (6/17;
35%): RR 2.23, 95% CI 1.11 to 4.48 (Analysis 3.1). Five participants were not included in the analysis with one participant lost
from the hydrogel-dressed group and four from the basic wound
contact-dressed group. As explained earlier, we have included these
participants in our analysis as denominators but not numerators
(i.e. assumed not to have healed). The mean time to healing was
reported as 10.3 weeks in the hydrogel-dressed group compared
with 11.69 weeks in the basic wound contact-dressed group. In
general median and not mean time to healing is the best time to
healing summary estimate. The use of mean vales can result in
biased estimates - since to calculate mean time to healing either
all participants must have healed and/or assumptions need to be
made about the shape of the survival curve.
Vandeputte 1997 had a follow-up of 12 weeks. Significantly more
ulcers healed in the hydrogel-dressed group (14/15; 93%) compared with the basic wound contact-dressed group (7/14; 50%):
RR 1.87, 95% CI 1.09 to 3.21 (Analysis 3.1).
We pooled ulcer healed data from these three studies (
D’Hemecourt 1998; Jensen 1998; Vandeputte 1997) with a total
of 198 participants using a fixed-effect model (Chi²: P = 0.77;
I² = 0%) (Analysis 3.1). Significantly more ulcers healed in the
hydrogel-dressed groups compared with the basic wound contact-dressed groups: RR 1.80, 95% 1.27 to 2.56. However, we
stress that the baseline ulcer grade was different in these trials:
D’Hemecourt 1998 (grade 3 and 4), Jensen 1998 (grade 2) and
Vandeputte 1997 (not specific about grade but did include more
severe ulcers), as was trial follow-up time. These differences may
partly explain the difference in overall ulcer healing that is observed in these studies (29% over 20 weeks in D’Hemecourt 1998
and 55% over 16 weeks in Jensen 1998).
Secondary outcomes:
D’Hemecourt 1998: reported the number of wound-related adverse events. There was no statistically significant difference in
number of adverse events between the hydrogel-dressed group
(19/70; 27%) and the basic wound contact-dressed group (25/68;
37%): RR 0.74, 95% CI 0.45 to 1.21 (Analysis 3.2). Neither was
there a statistically significant difference in number of participants
reporting pain as an adverse event between the groups (11/70;
16% in the hydrogel-treated group compared with 10/68; 15%):
RR 1.07, 95% CI 0.49 to 2.35 (Analysis 3.3).
Jensen 1998: there were no amputations in the hydrogel-dressed
group compared with one amputation in the basic wound contract-dressed group. Adverse events recording was minimal with
three specific adverse events being reported for the hydrogeldressed group compared with four for the basic wound contactHydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 14
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
dressed group. The average cost per day of treatment in US Dollars
was USD 7.01 in the hydrogel-dressed group and USD 12.28 in
the basic wound contact-dressed group. However, these costs were
not collected or compared as part of a full economic evaluation.
Vandeputte 1997: reported the number of infection related complications in each study group. There was no statistically significant difference in number of events between the hydrogel-dressed
group (1/15; 7%) compared with the basic wound contact-dressed
group (7/14; 50%): RR 0.14, 95% 0.02 to 1.01. It is important
to remember that this study did not have blinded outcome assessment and neither were the mechanisms for reporting adverse
events clearly detailed.
Given the lack of methodological detail regarding the collection of
adverse event data and the differences in the type of data presented,
we did not pool these data.
Summary: hydrogel dressings compared with basic wound
contact dressing
Data from three studies (n=198) found a statistically significant increase in the healing of diabetic foot ulcers in hydrogel-treated ulcers compared with those treated with basic wound contact dressings. This difference is driven by two small trials of unclear risk of
bias.
Advanced dressing compared with advanced dressing
Comparison 4: hydrogel dressing compared with hydrogel
dressing (one trial; 74 participants)
Primary outcome: ulcer healing
Whalley 2001 recruited 74 participants and compared one type
of hydrogel (Purilon) with another (Intrasite) for a maximum of
10 weeks. Data were only available from conference abstracts.
Whilst 74 participants were randomised, data were only presented
for 66 of these. The study reports that 35% of ulcers achieved
complete healing in the Purilon group compared with 19% in the
Intrasite group. The numbers of people in each group were not
reported in the abstract (attempts to contact author unsuccessful),
nor was the baseline comparability of the participants by treatment group which makes the data impossible to interpret with
confidence,
Secondary outcomes:
The direct cost of wound treatments to reach a 75% reduction in
wound area were reported to be 32% lower for the Purilon hydrogel. However, no further details are presented and we must stress
that this is a very limited analysis that should not be interpreted
as an economic evaluation.
Summary: hydrogel dressing compared with hydrogel dressing
There was no evidence that more ulcers dressed with a Purilon
hydrogel healed within 10 weeks compared with Intrasite-dressed
ulcers.
Summary of Findings Table
We have included a Summary of Findings table (Summary
of findings for the main comparison; Summary of findings 2;
Summary of findings 3; Summary of findings 4): this aims to give
a concise overview and synthesis of the volume and quality of
the evidence for this comparison. The Summary of Findings table
confirm our conclusion that the quality of evidence is of moderate quality where hydrogel is compared with basic wound contact
dressings: we note that according to the GRADE definition this
still means that “Further research is likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the
estimate.” We also note that the three studies in this comparison had limited details reported to inform the individual risk of
bias assessments. We did not downgrade the evidence under the
GRADE risk of bias for this comparison (as there were no domains assessed at high risk of bias) - however, a large number were
unclear and this must be acknowledged. The quality of estimates
for other comparisons is considered low.
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 15
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
A D D I T I O N A L S U M M A R Y O F F I N D I N G S [Explanation]
Hydrogel dressings compared to Larval therapy for foot ulcers in people with diabetes
Patient or population: patients with foot ulcers in people with diabetes
Settings:
Intervention: Hydrogel dressings
Comparison: Larval therapy
Outcomes Illustrative comparative risks* (95% CI) Relative effect
(95% CI)
No of Participants
(studies)
Quality of the evidence
(GRADE)
Comments
Assumed risk Corresponding risk
Larval therapy Hydrogel dressings
Number of ulcers healed
Follow-up: 10 days
Low risk of healing
1 RR 0.40
(0.08 to 1.99)
140
(1 study)
⊕⊕
low2,3
340 per 1000 136 per 1000
(27 to 677)
Moderate of healing
1
530 per 1000 212 per 1000
(42 to 1000)
High risk of healing
1
650 per 1000 260 per 1000
(52 to 1000)
*The basis for the assumed risk (e.g. the median control group risk across studies) is provided in footnotes. The corresponding risk (and its 95% confidence interval) is based on the
assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative effect of the intervention (and its 95% CI).
CI: Confidence interval; RR: Risk ratio;
16 Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review)
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
GRADE Working Group grades of evidence
High quality: Further research is very unlikely to change our confidence in the estimate of effect.
Moderate quality: Further research is likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate.
Low quality: Further research is very likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and is likely to change the estimate.
Very low quality: We are very uncertain about the estimate.
1 Baseline risk of healing obtained from external source in which data from 27,630 patients with a diabetic neuropathic foot ulcer was
used to develop a simple prognostic model to predict likelihood of ulcer healing (Margolis DJ, Allen-Taylor L, Hoffstad O, Berlin JA.
Diabetic neuropathic foot ulcers: predicting which ones will not heal. Am J Med. 2003;115:627-31). It is important to note that given
an outcome of ulcer healing, low risk refers to a low risk of healing and thus reflects the most severe patient populations. Conversely
high risk refers to a high risk of healing
2 All domains classed at unclear risk of bias making judgement difficult.
3 7 participants achieved the endpoint of healing in the study, this is an underpowered comparison. The confidence interval around the
estimate of relative risk is consistent with a 92% relative reduction in healing with hydrogel and a 199% relative increase in healing with
hydrogel.
17 Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review)
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Hydrogel dressing compared to platelet-derived growth factor for Foot ulcers in people with diabetes
Patient or population: patients with Foot ulcers in people with diabetes
Settings:
Intervention: Hydrogel dressing
Comparison: platelet-derived growth factor
Outcomes Illustrative comparative risks* (95% CI) Relative effect
(95% CI)
No of Participants
(studies)
Quality of the evidence
(GRADE)
Comments
Assumed risk Corresponding risk
Platelet-dervided
growth factor
Hydrogel dressing
Number of ulcers healed
Follow-up: 20 weeks
Low risk of healing1 RR 0.81
(0.5 to 1.32)
104
(1 study)
⊕⊕
low2
340 per 1000 275 per 1000
(170 to 449)
Moderate risk of healing1
530 per 1000 429 per 1000
(265 to 700)
High risk of healing1
650 per 1000 527 per 1000
(325 to 858)
*The basis for the assumed risk (e.g. the median control group risk across studies) is provided in footnotes. The corresponding risk (and its 95% confidence interval) is based on the
assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative effect of the intervention (and its 95% CI).
CI: Confidence interval; RR: Risk ratio;
18 Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review)
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
GRADE Working Group grades of evidence
High quality: Further research is very unlikely to change our confidence in the estimate of effect.
Moderate quality: Further research is likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate.
Low quality: Further research is very likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and is likely to change the estimate.
Very low quality: We are very uncertain about the estimate.
1 Baseline risk of healing obtained from external source in which data from 27,630 patients with a diabetic neuropathic foot ulcer was
used to develop a simple prognostic model to predict likelihood of ulcer healing (Margolis DJ, Allen-Taylor L, Hoffstad O, Berlin JA.
Diabetic neuropathic foot ulcers: predicting which ones will not heal. Am J Med. 2003;115:627-31). It is important to note that given
an outcome of ulcer healing, low risk refers to a low risk of healing and thus reflects the most severe patient populations. Conversely
high risk refers to a high risk of healing
2 40 participants achieved the endpoint of healing in the study, this is an underpowered comparison. The confidence interval around the
estimate of relative risk is consistent with a 39% relative reduction in healing with hydrogel and a 26% relative increase in healing with
hydrogel.
19 Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review)
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Purilon hydrogel compared to Intrasite hydrogel for foot ulcers in people with diabetes
Patient or population: patients with foot ulcers in people with diabetes
Settings:
Intervention: Purilon hydrogel
Comparison: Intrasite hydrogel
Outcomes Illustrative comparative risks* (95% CI) Relative effect
(95% CI)
No of Participants
(studies)
Quality of the evidence
(GRADE)
Comments
Assumed risk Corresponding risk
Intrasite hydrogel Purilon hydrogel
Number of ulcers healed
Follow-up: 10 weeks
Study population Not estimable 0
(1 study)
See comment 35% of ulcers healed in
the Purilon group compared with 19% in the Intrasite group. The numbers
used for these calculations
are not presented. Limiting
analyses
See comment See comment
Moderate
*The basis for the assumed risk (e.g. the median control group risk across studies) is provided in footnotes. The corresponding risk (and its 95% confidence interval) is based on the
assumed risk in the comparison group and the relative effect of the intervention (and its 95% CI).
CI: Confidence interval; RR: Risk ratio;
GRADE Working Group grades of evidence
High quality: Further research is very unlikely to change our confidence in the estimate of effect.
Moderate quality: Further research is likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the estimate.
Low quality: Further research is very likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect and is likely to change the estimate.
Very low quality: We are very uncertain about the estimate.
20 Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review)
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
D I S C U S S I O N
Summary of main results
This review has identified, appraised and presented all available
RCT evidence (five studies) regarding the clinical effectiveness of
hydrogel wound dressings in the treatment of diabetic foot ulcers.
When data from three studies (20, 16 and 12 weeks follow-up;
n = 198) were pooled there was a statistically significant increase
in ulcer healing with hydrogel compared with basic wound contact dressings. All studies were at unclear risk of bias due to poor
reporting of trial methods. It is important to note that included
ulcers in D’Hemecourt 1998 were predominantly grade 3, where
as Jensen 1998 only included grade 2 ulcers. Ulcer grade was not
specified in Vandeputte 1997 but based on the inclusion criteria
there was the potential for more serious ulcers to be included. The
different ulcer grades may explain why study healing was lower
in D’Hemecourt 1998 compared to Jensen 1998 even though
D’Hemecourt 1998 had a longer follow-up time. There is no evidence to inform clinicians as to how hydrogel compares with other
advanced dressings in terms of clinical and/or cost-effectiveness.
There was no evidence of any difference between hydrogel and
larval therapy or platelet derived growth factor, nor between different brands of hydrogel in terms of ulcer healing.
Quality of the evidence
We deemed all studies to be at unclear risk of bias given the lack
of methodological detail reported. Many included studies did not
follow good practice conduct and reporting guidelines, e.g. CONSORT (Schulz 2010). Key areas of good practice are the robust
generation of a randomisation sequence, for example, computergenerated, robust allocation concealment, for example the use of a
telephone randomisation service, and blinded outcome assessment
where possible. All this information should be clearly stated in the
study report as all trial authors should anticipate the inclusion of
their trials in systematic reviews. In terms of analysis, where possible, data from all participants should be included, that is an intention-to-treat analysis is conducted. Steps should be taken during
trial conduct to prevent missing data as far as is possible. Where
missing data is an issue, imputation methods should be considered
and clearly reported when implemented. Finally, where possible,
robust economic data should be collected.
Potential biases in the review process
The review considered as much evidence as it was possible to obtain, including studies that were not published in English-language journals. We contacted relevant pharmaceutical companies
but did not receive any relevant RCT data from them. There is
the potential for publication bias. It is also important to note that
three studies are awaiting assessment and may be included in future reviews. However, we anticipate this is unlikely for the majority of these studies.
Agreements and disagreements with other
studies or reviews
Prior to this systematic review, the most recent and relevant review
regarding the healing of diabetic foot ulcers (Hinchliffe 2008)
included one RCT (Jensen 1998 also included here) that compared
a hydrogel dressing in the treatment of diabetic foot ulcers. No
conclusions were made regarding the results of this study. However,
our review included and pooled data from the same three studies
(D’Hemecourt 1998; Jensen 1998; Vandeputte 1997) as another
Cochrane Review (Edwards 2010), which had the primary aim of
assessing the debridement of diabetic foot ulcers. Thus Edwards
2010 also suggested that hydrogel may be more effective than basic
contact wound dressings in the treatment of diabetic foot ulcers.
However, caution must be advised in changing clinical practice on
the basis of findings informed largely by small trials of unknown
risk of bias. Clinicians should also be aware of the types of ulcers
that were included in each trial.
A U T H O R S ’ C O N C L U S I O N S
Implications for practice
Based on a comprehensive review of current evidence hydrogel
dressings may be better than basic contact wound dressings at
healing non-complex diabetic foot ulcers. However, any potential
change in practice regarding the use of hydrogels would need to be
informed by clinical experience and acknowledge the uncertainty
around this decision due to the quality of data used to inform
these analyses. It is also important to note that this review was
unable to present information on how hydrogel dressings compare
with other advanced wound dressings. Thus, practitioners may
elect to consider other characteristics such as cost and symptom
management properties when choosing between alternatives
Implications for research
Current evidence suggests that hydrogel may be better than basic
contact wound dressings at healing diabetic foot ulcers, although
there is some uncertainty around this decision. There is no available evidence regarding the effectiveness of hydrogel with other
advanced dressing types, thus further research may be warranted.
Given the large number of dressing options, the design of future
trials should be driven by the questions of high priority to patients
and other decision-makers. It is also important for research to ensure that the outcomes that are collected in research studies are
those that matter to patients, carers and health professionals. It
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 21
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
may be that dressings should be viewed as management tools and
that other treatments that address patient lifestyle issues merit the
main focus in terms of future research. Where trials are conducted,
good practice guidelines must be followed in their design, implementation and reporting. Further reviews are being conducted
to synthesise evidence regarding the effect of other dressings on
the treatment of diabetic foot ulcers. It would then be useful to
conduct further evidence synthesis (overview of reviews, mixed
treatment comparisons or both) to aid decision-making regarding
the choice of dressings for diabetic foot ulcers across all available
options.
A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T S
The authors would like to thank the following people who reviewed the protocol for clarity, readability and rigour: Wounds
Group editors (Julie Bruce, Andrea Nelson and Gill Worthy) and
peer referees (David Armstrong, Duncan Chambers and Janet
Yarrow). In addition we would like to acknowledge the contribution of the copy editor Jenny Bellorini.
R E F E R E N C E S
References to studies included in this review
D’Hemecourt 1998 {published data only}
D’Hemecourt PA, Smiell JM, Karim MR. Sodium
carboxymethyl cellulose aqueous-based gel vs becaplermin
gel in patients with nonhealing lower extremity diabetic
ulcers. Wounds 1998;10(3):69–75.
Jensen 1998 {published data only}
Jensen JL, Seeley J, Brian Gillin. A controlled, randomized
comparison of two moist wound healing protocols:
Carrasyn hydrogel wound dressing and wet-to-moist saline
gauze. Advances in Wound Care 1998;11(7 Suppl 1):1–4.
Markevich 2000 {published data only}
Markevich YO, McLeod-Roberts J, Mousley M, Melloy
E. Maggot therapy for diabetic neuropathic foot wounds.
Diabetologia: Proceedings of the 36th Annual Meeting of the
European Association for the Study of Diabetes 2000;43(Suppl
1):A 15.
Vandeputte 1997 {published data only}
Vandeputte J, Gryson L. Diabetic foot infection controlled
by immuno-modulating hydrogel containing 65% glycerine.
Presentation of a clinical trial. 6th European Conference on
Advances in Wound Management. Amsterdam, 1997:50–3.
Whalley 2001 {published data only}
Capillas R, Whalley A, Boulton AMJ, Dargis V, Harding
K, Van Acker K. Performance characteristics and safety
of hydrogels using a non-adhesive foam dressing as
secondary dressing in the treatment of diabetic foot ulcers.
12th Conference of the European Wound Management
Association; 23-25 May, 2002; Granada, Spain. Granada,
Spain, 2002.
Gottrup F, Hahn TW, Thomsen JK. Cost-effectiveness of
hydrogel treatment in diabetic foot ulcers. 12th Conference
of the European Wound Management Association; 23-25
May, 2002; Granada, Spain. 2002.
∗ Whalley A, Boulton AJM, Harding K, Van Acker K,
Capillas R. Performance characteristics and safety of Purilon
gel versus Intrasite using Biatain non-adhesive dressing as
secondary dressing in the treatment of diabetic foot ulcers.
11th european tissue repair society annual conference; 2001
5-8 September; Cardiff, Wales. Cardiff, Wales, 2001.
References to studies excluded from this review
Agas 2006 {published data only}
Agas CM, Bui TD, Driver VR, Gordon IL. Effect of
window casts on healing rates of diabetic foot ulcers. Journal
of Wound Care 2006;15(2):80–3.
Ahroni 1993 {published data only}
Ahroni JH, Boyko EJ, Pecoraro RE. Diabetic foot ulcer
healing: extrinsic vs intrinsic factors. Wounds 1993;5(5):
245–55.
Altman 1993 {published data only}
Altman MI, Mulder GD. Multi-centre evaluation of NuGel wound dressing in full-thickness chronic wounds of the
lower extremities. 3rd European Conference on Advances
in Wound Management. Harrogate, UK, 1993,19–22
October.
Alvarez 2003 {published data only}
Alvarez OM, Roger RS, Booker JG, Patel M. Effect of non
contact normothermic wound therapy on the healing of
neuropathic (diabetic) foot ulcers: an interim analysis of
20 patients. Journal of Foot and Ankle Surgery 2003;42(1):
30–5.
Apelqvist 1990 {published data only}
Apelqvist J, Larsson J, Stenstrom A. Topical treatment of
necrotic foot ulcers in diabetic patients:a comparative trial
of DuoDerm and MeZinc. British Journal of Dermatology
1990;123:787–92.
Apelqvist 1996 {published data only}
Apelqvist J, Ragnarson-Tennvall G. Cavity foot ulcers in
diabetic patients: a comparative study of cadexomer iodine
ointment and standard treatment. An economic analysis
alongside a clinical trial. Acta Dermato-Venereologica 1996;
76(3):321–5.
Apelqvist 2004 {published data only}
Apelqvist J, Piaggesi A. Enamel matrix protein in diabetic
foot ulcers: a controlled multicentre study. 2nd World
Union of Wound Healing Societies Meeting. Paris, 2004,
8–13.
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 22
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Armstrong 2004 {published data only}
Armstrong DG, Lavery LA, Frykberg RG, Andros G,
Attinger CE, Boulton AJM. VAC therapy appears to heal
complex DFU. 2nd World Union of Wound Healing
Societies Meeting; 8-13 July, 2004; Paris. 2004.
Baker 1993 {unpublished data only}
Baker NR, Creevy J. A randomised comparative pilot study
to evaluate Allevyn hydrocellular dressings and Sorbsan
calcium-alginate dressings in the treatment of diabetic foot
ulcers. Unpublished 1993.
Belcaro 2010 {published data only}
Belcaro G, Cesarone MR, Errichi BM, Ricci A, Dugall
M, Pellegrini L, et al.Venous and diabetic ulcerations:
management with topical multivalent silver oxide ointment.
Panminerva Medica 2010;52(2 (Suppl 1)):37–42.
Blackman 1994 {published data only}
Blackman JD, Senseng D, Quinn L, Mazzone T. Clinical
evaluation of a semipermeable polymeric membrane
dressing for the treatment of chronic diabetic foot ulcers.
Diabetic Care 1994;17(4):322–5.
Bogaert 2004 {published data only}
Bogaert T, Meert S, Derre B, Goethals E. Topical autologous
platelet gel enhances healing of chronic diabetic ulcer:
Preliminary report. 22nd World Union of Wound Healing
Societies Meeting; 8-13 July, 2004; Paris. 2004.
Bradshaw 1989 {published data only}
Bradshaw T, Gem J, Boulton A. The use of Kaltostat in the
treatment of ulceration in the diabetic foot. Chiropodist
1989;44(9):204–7.
Caravaggi 2003 {published data only}
Caravaggi C, De Giglio R, Pritelli C, Sommaria M, Dalla
Noce S, Faglia E, et al.HYAFF 11-based autologous dermal
and epidermal grafts in the treatment of noninfected
diabetic plantar and dorsal foot ulcers: a prospective,
multicenter, controlled, randomized clinical trial. Diabetes
Care 2006;10:2853–9.
Chang 2000 {published data only}
Chang DW, Sanchez LA, Veith FJ, Wain RA, Okhi T, Suggs
WD. Can a tissue-engineered skin graft improve healing of
lower extremity foot wounds after revascularization?. Annals
of Vascular Surgery 2000;14:44–9.
Chauhan 2003 {published data only}
Chauhan VS, Rasheed MA, Pandley SS, Shukla VK.
Nonhealing wounds - a therapeutic dilemma. International
Journal of Lower Extremity Wounds 2003;2(1):40–5.
Chirwa 2010 {published and unpublished data}
Chirwa Z, Bhengu T, Litiane K. The cost effectiveness of
using calcium alginate silver matrix in the treatment of
wounds. European Wound Management Association Journal
2010;10(2):257, Abstract P299.
Clever 1995 {published data only}
Clever HU, Dreyer M. Comparing two wound dressings
for the treatment of neuropathic diabetic foot ulcers. 5th
European Conference on Advances in Wound Management;
Harrogate, UK. 1995:201–3.
Cuevas 2007 {published data only}
Cuevas FR, Velázquez Méndez AA, Andrade IC. Zinc
hyaluronate effects on ulcers in diabetic patients [Efecto
delhialuronato de zinc sobre las úlceras en pacientes con
diabetes]. Gerokomos 2007;18(2):91–105.
Dash 2009 {published data only}
Dash NR, Dash SN, Routray P, Mohapatra S, Mohapatra
PC. Targeting nonhealing ulcers of lower extremity
in human through autologous bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stem cells. Rejuvenation Research 2009;12(5):
359–66.
Diehm 2005 {published data only}
Diehm C, Lawall H. Evaluation of Tielle hydro polymer
dressings in the management of chronic exuding wounds
in primary care. International Wound Journal 2005;2(1):
26–35.
Donaghue 1998 {published data only}
Donaghue VM, Chrzan JS, Rosenblum BI, Giurini JM,
Habershaw GM, Veves A. Evaluation of a collagen-alginate
wound dressing in the management of diabetic foot ulcers.
Advances in Wound Care 1998;11(3):114–9.
Driver 2006 {published data only}
Driver VR, Hanft J, Fylling CP, Beriou JM, Autologel
Diabetic Foot Ulcer Study Group. A prospective,
randomized, controlled trial of autologous platelet-rich
plasma gel for the treatment of diabetic foot ulcers. Ostomy/
Wound Management 2006;52(6):68-70, 72, 74.
Edmonds 2009 {published data only}
Edmonds M. Apligraf in the treatment of neuropathic
diabetic foot ulcers. International Journal of Lower Extremity
Wounds 2009;8(1):11–8.
Eginton 2003 {published data only}
Eginton MT, Brown KR, Seabrook GR, Towne JB, Cambria
RA. A prospective randomized evaluation of negativepressure wound dressings for diabetic foot wounds. Annals
of Vascular Surgery 2003;17(6):645–9.
Etoz 2003 {published data only}
Etoz A, Ozgenel Y, Ozcan M. The use of negative pressure
wound therapy on diabetic foot ulcers: a preliminary
controlled trial. Wounds: A Compendium of Clinical Research
and Practice 2004;16(8):264–9.
Farac 1999 {published data only}
Farac KP, Grief R, Sessler DI. Radiant heat bandage speeds
healing of diabetic-neuropathic foot ulcers. 31st Annual
Wound, Ostomy and Continence Conference; June 1999;
Minneapolis, MN. 1999.
Foo 2004 {published data only}
Foo LSS, Chua BSY, Chia GT, Tan SB, Howe TS. Vacuum
assisted closure vs moist gauze dressing in post-operative
diabetic foot wounds: early results from a randomised
controlled trial. 2nd World Union of Wound Healing
Societies Meeting; 8-13 July, 2004; Paris. July, Paris, 2004.
Foster 1994 {published data only}
Foster AVM, Greenhill MT, Edmonds ME. Comparing two
dressings in the treatment of diabetic foot ulcers. Journal of
Wound Care 1994;3(5):224–8.
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 23
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Foster 1999 {published data only}
Foster A, Bates M, Doxford M, Edmonds ME. Treatment
of indolent neuropathic ulceration of the diabetic foot with
Hyaff. The Diabetic Foot 1999;2(2):72.
Gao 2007 {published data only}
Gao L, Xu GX, Zhou HB. Efficacy evaluation of diabetic
foot ulceration treated with iodophors dressings therapy.
Journal of Clinical Nursing 2007;6(4):21–2.
Gentzkow 1996 {published data only}
Gentzkow GD, Iwasaki SD, Hershon KS, Mengel M,
Prendergast JJ, Ricotta JJ, et al.Use of Dermagraft, a
cultured human dermis, to treat diabetic foot ulcers.
Diabetes Care 1996;19(4):350–4.
Gottrup 2011 {published data only}
∗ Gottrup F, Gibson M, Karlsmark T, Bishoff-Mikkelsen
M, Nisbet L, Cullen B. Collagen/ORC/silver treatment of
diabetic foot ulcers; a randomised controlled trial. Wound
Repair and Regeneration 2011;19(2):A24.
Gottrup F, Karlsmark T, Cullen B, Gibson M, Nisbet L.
Comparative clinical study to determine the effects of
collagen/orc+silver therapy on wound healing of diabetic
foot ulcers. EWMA Journal 2010;10(2):83 Abstract 126.
Hanft 2002 {published data only}
Hanft JR, Surprenant MS. Healing of chronic foot ulcers
in diabetic patients treated with a human fibroblast-derived
dermis. Journal of Foot and Ankle Surgery 2002;41(5):291.
Jeffcoate 2009 {published data only}
Jeffcoate WJ, Price PE, Phillips CJ, Game FL, Mudge E,
Davies S, et al.Randomised controlled trial of the use of
three dressing preparations in the management of chronic
ulceration of the foot in diabetes. Health Technology
Assessment 2009;13(54):1–110.
Jeffery 2008 {published data only}
Jeffery S. A honey-based dressing for diabetic foot ulcers:
a controlled study. The Diabetic Foot Journal 2008;11(2):
87–91.
Jude 2007 {published data only}
Jude EB, Apelqvist, Spraul M, Martini J. Prospective
randomized controlled study of Hydrofiber dressing
containing ionic silver or calcium alginate dressings in nonischaemic diabetic foot ulcers. Diabetic Medicine 2007;24:
280–8.
Kordestani 2008 {published data only}
Kordestani S, Shahrezaee M, Tahmasebi MN, Hajimahmodi
H, Ghasemali DH, Abyaneh MS. A randomised controlled
trial on the effectiveness of an advanced wound dressing
used in Iran. Journal of Wound Care 2008;17(7):323–7.
Lalau 2002 {published data only}
Lalau JD, Bresson R, Charpentier P, Coliche V, Erlher S,
Ha Van G, et al.Efficacy and tolerance of calcium alginate
versus Vaseline gauze dressings in the treatment of diabetic
foot lesions. Diabetes & Metabolism 2002;28(3):223–9.
Landsman 2010 {published data only}
Landsman A, Agnew P, Parish L, Joseph R, Galiano
RD. Diabetic foot ulcers treated with Becaplermin and
TheraGauze, a moisture-controlling smart dressing: a
randomized, multicenter, prospective analysis. Journal of
the American Podiatric Medical Association 2010;100(3):
155–60.
Lazaro-Martinez 2007 {published data only}
Lázaro-Martíneza JL, García-Moralesa E, AragónSánchezc FJ. Randomized comparative trial of a collagen/
oxidized regenerated cellulose dressing in the treatment of
neuropathic diabetic foot ulcers. 18th Conference of the
European Wound Management Association. Universidad,
Complutense, Spain, 2008:Poster 371.
∗ Lázaro-Martíneza JL, García-Moralesa E, BeneitMontesinosa JV, Martínez-de-Jesúsb FR, AragónSánchezc FJ. Randomized comparative trial of a collagen/
oxidized regenerated cellulose dressing in the treatment
of neuropathic diabetic foot ulcers [Estudio aleatorizado
y comparativo de unapósito de colágeno y celulosa
oxidadaregenerada en el tratamiento de úlcerasneuropáticas
de pie diabético]. Cirugia Espanola 2007;82(1):27–31.
Lipkin 2003 {published data only}
Lipkin S, Chaikof E, Isseroff Z, Silverstein P. Effectiveness of
bilayered cellular matrix in healing of neuropathic diabetic
foot ulcers: results of a multicenter pilot trial. Wounds: A
Compendium of Clinical Research and Practice 2003;15(7):
230–6.
Marston 2001 {published data only}
Marston W, Foushee K, Farber M. Prospective randomized
study of a cryopreserved, human fibroblast-derived dermis
in the treatment of chronic plantar foot ulcers associated
with diabetes mellitus. 14th Annual Symposium on
Advances in Wound Care and Medical Research Forum on
Wound Repair; 30 April-3 May, 2001. Las Vegas, Nevada,
2001.
Mazzone 1993 {published data only}
Mazzone T, Blackman JD. [Evaluation of a new loaded
foam membrane on the healing rate of diabetic foot ulcers].
1st Joint Meeting of the Wound Healing Society and
the European Tissue Repair Society; Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. 1993.
McCallon 2000 {published data only}
McCallon SK, Knight CA, Valiulus JP, Cunningham MW,
McCulloch, Farinas LP. Vacuum-Assisted Closure versus
saline moistened gauze in the healing of postoperative
diabetic foot wounds. Ostomy/Wound Management 2000;46
(8):28–34.
Mody 2008 {published data only}
Mody GN, Nirmal IA, Duraisamy S, Perakath B. A
blinded, prospective, randomized controlled trial of topical
negative pressure wound closure in India. Ostomy/Wound
Management 2008;54(12):36–46.
Moretti 2009 {published data only}
Moretti B, Notarnicola A, Maggio G, Moretti L, Pascone
M, Tafuri S, et al.The management of neuropathic ulcers
of the foot in diabetes by shock wave therapy. BMC
Musculoskeletal Disorders 2009; Vol. 10, issue 54. [DOI:
10.1186/1471-2474-10-54]
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 24
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Mueller 1989 {published data only}
Mueller MJ, Diamond JE, Sinacore DR, Delitto A, Blair
VP, Drury DA, et al.Total contact casting in treatment of
diabetic plantar ulcers. Diabetes Care 1989;12(6):184–8.
Mulder 1994 {published data only}
Mulder GD, Jensen JL, Seeley JE, Peak Andrews K. A
controlled randomized study of an amorphous hydrogel to
expedite closure of diabetic ulcers. 4th European Tissue
Repair Society Meeting; 25-28 August 1994; Oxford,
England. 1994.
Munter 2006 {published data only}
Munter KC, Beele H, Russell L, Basse E, Grochenig E,
Crespi A, et al.CONTOP study: improved healing of
delayed healing ulcers with sustained silver-releasing foam
dressing versus other silver dressings. 16th Conference of
the European Wound Management Association; 16-18 May
2006. Prague, Czech Republic, 2006.
Munter KC, Beele H, Russell L, Basse PB, Groechenig
E, Crespi A, et al.The CONTOP study: a large-scale,
comparative, randomized study in patients treated with a
sustained silver-releasing foam dressing. SAWC; 30 April-3
May 2006. San Antonio,Texas, 2006.
∗ Munter KC, Beele H, Russell L, Crespi A, Grocenig E,
Basse P, et al.Effect of a sustained silver-releasing dressing on
ulcers with delayed healing: The CONTOP study. Journal
of Wound Care 2006;15(5):199–205.
Russell L, Nebbioso G, Munter KC, Beele H, Basse
PB/Dienst H. The Contop Study: a hydro-activated silver
containing foam dressing versus standard care. 2nd World
Union of Wound Healing Societies Meeting; 8-13 July
2004; Paris. Paris, 2004.
Scalise A, Forma O, Happe M, Hahn TW. The Contop
study: real life experiences from an international study
comparing a silver containing hydro-activated foam
dressing with standard wound care. 13th Conference of the
European Wound Management Association; 22-23 May
2003; Pisa, Italy. 2003.
Novinscak 2010 {published data only}
Novinscak T, Zvorc M, Trojko S, Jozinovic E, Filipovic M,
Grudic R. Comparison of cost-benefit of the three methods
of diabetic ulcer treatment: dry, moist and negative pressure.
Acta Medica Croatica 2010;64(Suppl 1):113–5.
Ogce 2007 {published data only}
Ogce F, Dramali A. The treatment of diabetic foot ulcers.
Sendrom 2007;19(12):79–81.
Palao i Domenech 2008 {published data only}
Palao i Domenech R, Romanelli M, Tsiftsis DD, Slonkova
V, Jortikka A, Johannesen N, et al.Effect of an ibuprofenreleasing foam dressing on wound pain: a real-life RCT.
Journal of Wound Care 2008;17(8):344–8.
Parish 2009 {published data only}
Parish L, Routh H, Parish J. Diabetic foot ulcers: a
randomized multicenter study comparing a moisturecontrolling dressing with a topical growth factor. Journal
of the American Academy of Dermatology 2009;60(Suppl 3):
AB202.
Pham 1999 {published data only}
Pham HT, Rosenblum BI, Lyons TE, Giurini JM, Chrzan
JS, Habershaw GM, et al.Evaluation of a human skin
equivalent for the treatment of diabetic foot ulcers in
a prospective, randomized, clinical trial. Wounds: A
Compendium of Clinical Research and Practice 1999;11(4):
76–86.
Piaggesi 1997 {published data only}
Piaggesi A. A thin hydrocolloid occlusive dressing in diabetic
foot ulcerations. Journal of Wound Care 1997;6(3):10.
Piaggesi 2001 {published data only}
Piaggesi A, Baccetti F, Rizzo L, Romanelli, Navalesi R,
Benzi L. Sodium carboxyl-methyl-cellulose dressings in the
management of deep ulcerations of diabetic foot. Diabetic
Medicine 2001;18:320–4.
Reyzelman 2009 {published data only}
Reyzelman A, Crews RT, Moore JC, Moore L, Mukker JS,
Offutt S, et al.Clinical effectiveness of an acellular dermal
regenerative tissue matrix compared to standard wound
management in healing diabetic foot ulcers: a prospective,
randomised, multicentre study. International Wound Journal
2009;6(3):196–208.
Roberts 2001 {published data only}
Roberts GH, Hammad LH, Haggan G, Baker N, Sandeman
D, Mani R, et al.Hydrocellular against non-adherent
dressings to treat diabetic foot ulcers - a randomised
controlled study. 11th ETRS Annual Conference. 2001.
Robson 2005 {published data only}
Robson MC, Payne WG, Garner WL, Biundo J, Giacalone
VF, Cooper DM, et al.Integrating the results of phase IV
(post marketing) clinical trial with four previous trials
reinforces the position that Regranex (Becaplermin) gel
0.01% is an effective adjunct to the treatment of diabetic
foot ulcers. Journal of Applied Research 2005;5(1):35–45.
Robson 2009 {published data only}
Robson V, Dodd S, Thomas S. Standardized antibacterial
honey (Medihoney) with standard therapy in wound care:
randomized clinical trial. Journal of Advanced Nursing
2009;65(3):565–75.
Sabolinski 2000 {published data only}
Sabolinski M, Giovino K, Graftskin Diabetic Foot Ulcer
Study Group. Risk factors associated with the healing of
diabetic foot ulcers. Wound Healing Society Educational
Symposium. Toronto, Canada, 2000, 4–6 June.
Sabolinski M, Toole T, Giovino K, Apligraft Diabetic Foot
Ulcer Study Group. Apligraf (Graftskin) bilayered living
skin construct in the treatment of diabetic foot ulcers. First
World Wound Healing Congress. Melbourne, Australia,
2000, 10–13 September.
∗ Sabolinski ML, Veves A. Graftskin (Apligraf ) in
neuropathic diabetic foot ulcers. Wounds: A Compendium
of Clinical Research and Practice 2000;12(5 (Suppl A)):
33A–6A.
Sabolinski ML, Veves A. Graftskin bilayered living skin
construct in the treatment of diabetic foot ulcers. 13th
Annual Symposium on Advanced Wound Care and 10th
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 25
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Annual Medical Research Forum on Wound Repair. Dallas,
USA, 1–4 April 2000.
Veves A, Falango V, Armstrong DG, Sabolinski ML.
Graftskin (Apligraf ) a human skin equivalent, promotes
wound healing in diabetic foot ulcers in a prospective,
randomized, multicenter clinical trial. Tenth Annual
Meeting of the European Tissue Repair Society. Brussels,
Belgium, 24-27 May 2000.
Sabolinski 2001 {published data only}
Sabolinski M, Falanga V. The healing of diabetic plantar
foot ulcers of greater than two-month duration with
Graftskin in a randomized prospective study. Eleventh
Annual Meeting and Educational Symposium Wound
Healing Society. Albuquerque, New Mexico, 2001, 16–18
May.
Shaw 2010 {published data only}
Shaw J, Hughes CM, Lagan KM, Stevenson MR, Irwin
CR, Bell PM. The effect of topical phenytoin on healing
in diabetic foot ulcers: a randomised controlled trial.
Diabetologia 2010;53(Suppl 1):S463.
Shukrimi 2008 {published data only}
Shukrimi A, Sulaiman AR, Halim AY, Azril A. A
comparative study between honey and povidone iodine as
dressing solution for Wagner type II diabetic foot ulcers.
Medical Journal of Malaysia 2008;63(1):44–6.
Sibbald 2011 {published data only}
Sibbald RG, Coutts P, Woo KY. Reduction of bacterial
burden and pain in chronic wounds using a new
polyhexamethylene biguanide antimicrobial foam dressingclinical trial results. Advances in Skin and Wound Care
2011;24(2):78–84.
Solway 2011 {published data only}
Solway DR, Clark WA, Levinson DJ. A parallel open-label
trial to evaluate microbial cellulose wound dressing in the
treatment of diabetic foot ulcers. International Wound
Journal 2011;8(1):69–73.
Steed 1992 {published data only}
∗ Holloway GA, Steed DL, DeMarco MJ, Matsumoto T,
Moosa HH, Webster MW, et al.A randomized controlled
multicenter dose response trial of activated platelet
supernatant topical CT-102 in chronic nonhealing diabetic
wounds. Wounds: A Compendium of Clinical Research and
Practice 1993;5(4):198–206.
Steed DL. Growth factors in managing diabetic foot ulcers.
5th Annual Symposium on Advanced Wound Care. New
Orleans, Louisiana, 23–25 April, 1992.
Steed DL, Goslen JB, Holloway GA, Malone JM, Bunt TJ,
Webster MW. Randomized prospective double-blind trial
in healing chronic diabetic foot ulcers. Diabetic Care 1992;
15(11):1598–604.
Steed 1995 {published data only}
Steed DL, Ricotta JJ, Prendergast JJ, Kaplan RJ, Webstar
MW, McGill JB. Promotion and acceleration of diabetic
ulcer healing by arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (RGD)
peptide matrix. RGD Study Group. Diabetes Care 18;1:
39–46.
Steed 1996 {published data only}
Steed DL, Edington HD, Webster MW. Recurrence rate
of diabetic neurotrophic foot ulcers healed using topical
application of growth factors released from platelets. Wound
Repair and Regeneration 1996;4(2):230–3.
Subrahmanyam 1993 {published data only}
Subrahmanyam M. Honey as a surgical dressing for burns
and ulcers. Indian Journal of Surgery 1993;55(9):468–73.
Trial 2010 {published data only}
Teot L, Trial C, Lavigne JP. Results of RCT on the
antimicrobial effectiveness of a new silver alginate wound
dressing. European Wound Management Association Journal
2008;8(Suppl 2):54 Abstract no. 69.
∗ Trial C, Darbas H, Lavigne J-P, Sotto A, Simoneau G,
Tillet Y, et al.Assessment of the antimicrobial effectiveness
of a new silver alginate wound dressing: a RCT. Journal of
Wound Care 2010;19(1):20–6.
Turns 2012 {published data only}
Turns M. Evaluation of NOSF in neuropathic diabetic.
Wounds UK 2012;8(1):100–106.
Urbaneie 1999 {published data only}
Urbaneie-Rovan V. Efficacy and cost of different dressings.
Practical Diabetes International 1999;16(2):S3.
Varma 2006 {published data only}
Varma AK, Bal A, Kumar H, Kesav R, Nair S. Efficacy of
polyurethane foam dressing in debrided diabetic lower limb
wounds. Wounds: A Compendium of Clinical Research and
Practice 2006;18(10):300–6.
Veves 2001 {published data only}
Veves A, Falanga V, Armstrong DG, Sabolinski ML.
Graftskin, a human skin equivalent, is effective in the
management of neuropathic diabetic foot ulcers. Diabetes
Care 2001;24(2):290–5.
Veves 2002 {published data only}
Sheehan P, Jones P, Caselli A, Giurini JM, Veves A. Percent
change in wound area of diabetic foot ulcers over a 4-week
period is a robust predictor of complete healing in a 12-
week prospective trial. Diabetes Care 2003;26(6):1879–82.
Veves A. Promogran clinical trial. The Diabetic Foot 2001;4
(4):S4–S5.
Veves A. Wound care device expert meeting. Summary
report. Promogran - clinical trial data. The Diabetic Foot
2001;4(3):S8–S10.
∗ Veves A, Sheehan P, Pham HT. A randomized controlled
trial of Promogran (a collagen / oxidised regenerated
cellulose dressing) vs standard treatment in the management
of diabetic foot ulcers. Archives of Surgery 2002;137:822–7.
Woo 2010 {published data only}
Woo K, Sibbald G, Coutts P. Reduction of infection and
pain in chronic wounds using a new antimicrobial foam
dressing. European Wound Management Association Journal
2010;10(2):59 Abstract 78.
Yao 2007 {published data only}
Yao XZ, Chen W. Effectiveness of feet soaking with Chinese
herbs combined with changing dressings in the treatment of
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 26
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
diabetic foot ulceration. Journal of Nursing Science 2007;22
(5):42–3.
Zimny 2003 {published data only}
Zimny S, Schatz H, Pfohl U. The effects of applied felted
foam on wound healing and healing times in the therapy of
neuropathic diabetic foot ulcers. Diabetic Medicine 2003;
20(8):622–5.
References to studies awaiting assessment
Wang 2012 {published data only}
Wang F, Yuan N, Wang Y, Wang C, Wang A, Yu T, Liu G,
Xu Z, Ran X. Clinical study on topical bismuth subgallate/
borneol (Suile) dressing for treatment of diabetic foot
ulcers]. [Chinese] . Zhongguo xiu fu chong jian wai ke za
zhi [Chinese journal of reparative and reconstructive surgery]
2012;26(8):955–960.
Additional references
Abbott 2002
Abbott CA, Carrington AL, Ashe H, Bath S, Every LC,
Griffiths J, et al.The North West Diabetes Foot Care Study:
incidence of and risk factors for, new diabetic foot ulceration
in a community-based patient cohort. Diabetic Medicine
2002;19:377–84.
Apelqvist 2000a
Apelqvist J, Bakker K, van Houtum WH, Nabuurs-Franssen
MH, Schaper NC. International consensus and practical
guidelines on the management and the prevention of the
diabetic foot. International Working Group on the Diabetic
Foot. Diabetes Metabolism Research and Review 2000;16
(Suppl 1):S84–92.
Apelqvist 2000b
Apelqvist J, Larsson J. What is the most effective way
to reduce incidence of amputation in the diabetic foot?.
Diabetes Metabolism Research and Reviews 2000;16(Suppl
1):S75–83.
Bergin 2006
Bergin SM, Wraight P. Silver based wound dressings and
topical agents for treating diabetic foot ulcers. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews 2006, Issue 1. [DOI:
10.1002/14651858.CD005082.pub2]
BNF 2010
British Medical Association and Royal Pharmaceutical
Society of Great Britain. British National Formulary
Appendix 8: Wound management products and elastic
hosiery. http://www.bnf.org.uk/bnf/bnf/current Sept 2010;
60.
Cardinal 2009
Cardinal M, Eisenbud DE, Armstrong DG, Zelen C,
Driver V, Attinger C, et al.Serial surgical debridement: a
retrospective study on clinical outcomes in chronic lower
extremity wounds. Wound Repair and Regeneration 2009;17
(3):306–11.
Currie 1998
Currie CJ, Morgan CL, Peters JR. The epidemiology
and cost of inpatient care for peripheral vascular disease,
infection, neuropathy, and ulceration in diabetes. Diabetes
Care 1998;21(1):42–8.
Deeks 2002
Deeks JJ. Issues in the selection of a summary statistic
for meta-analysis of clinical trials with binary outcomes.
Statistics in Medicine 2002;21:1575–600.
Diabetes UK
www.diabetes.org.uk. Key diabetes statistics and reports.
www.diabetes.org.uk, accessed July 2011.
Dorresteijn 2010
Dorresteijn JAN, Kriegsman DMW, Valk GD. Complex
interventions for preventing diabetic foot ulceration.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2010, Issue 1.
[DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD007610.pub2]
Edwards 2010
Edwards J, Stapley S. Debridement of diabetic foot ulcers.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2010, Issue 1.
[DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003556]
Fiskin 1996
Fiskin R, Digby M. Which dressing for diabetic foot ulcers?
. Practical Diabetes International 1996;13(4):107–9.
Gregg 2004
Gregg EW, Sorlie P, Paulose-Ram R, Gu Q, Eberhardt MS,
Wolz M, et al.Prevalence of lower-extremity disease in the
U.S. adult population >40 years of age with and without
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2004;27(7):1591–7.
Higgins 2003
Higgins JPT, Thompson SG, Deeks JJ, Altman DG.
Measuring inconsistency in meta-analyses. BMJ 2003;327
(7414):557–60.
Higgins 2009
Higgins JPT, Green S (editors). Cochrane Handbook for
Systematic Reviews of Interventions Version 5.0.2 [updated
September 2009]. The Cochrane Collaboration, 2008.
Available from www.cochrane-handbook.org.
Hinchliffe 2008
Hinchliffe R, Valk GD, Apelqvist J, Armstrong DG, Bakker
K, Game FL, et al.A systematic review of the effectiveness of
interventions to enhance the healing of chronic ulcers of the
foot in diabetes. Diabetes Metabolism Research Review 2008;
24(Suppl 1):S119–44.
Kumar 1994
Kumar S, Ashe HA, Parnell LN, Fernando DJ, Tsigos C,
Young RJ, et al.The prevalence of foot ulceration and its
correlates in type 2 diabetic patients: a population-based
study. Diabetic Medicine 1994;11:480–4.
Lefebvre 2011
Lefebvre C, Manheimer E, Glanville J, on behalf of the
Cochrane Information Retrieval Methods Group. Chapter
6: Searching for studies. In: Higgins JPT, Green S
(editors). Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews
of Interventions Version 5.1.0 [updated March 2011].
The Cochrane Collaboration, 2011. Available from
www.cochrane-handbook.org.
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 27
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Margolis 1999
Margolis D, Kantor J, Berlin J. Healing of diabetic
neuropathic foot ulcers receiving standard treatment. A
meta-analysis. Diabetes Care 1999;22:692–5.
Mason 1999
Mason J, O’Keeffe C, Hutchinson A, McIntosh A, Young R,
Booth A. A systematic review of foot ulcer in patients with
type 2 diabetes mellitus. II: treatment. Diabetes Medicine
1999;16(11):889–909.
Morris 1998
Morris AD, McAlpine R, Steinke D, Boyle DI, Ebrahim
AR, Vasudev N, et al.Diabetes and lower limb amputations
in the community. A retrospective cohort study. DARTS/
MEMO Collaboration. Diabetes Audit and Research in
Tayside Scotland/Medicines Monitoring Unit. Diabetes
Care 1998;21:738–43.
Murray 1996
Murray HJ, Young MJ, Hollis S, Boulton AJ. The
association between callus formation, high pressures and
neuropathy in diabetic foot ulceration. Diabetic Medicine
1996;13:979–82.
Nelson 2006
Nelson EA, O’Meara S, Golder S, Dalton J, Craig D,
Iglesias C, DASIDU Steering Group. Systematic review of
antimicrobial treatments for diabetic foot ulcers. Diabetes
Medicine 2006;23(4):348–59.
O’Meara 2000
Meara S, Cullum N, Majid M, Sheldon T. Systematic
reviews of wound care management: (3) antimicrobial
agents for chronic wounds; (4) diabetic foot ulceration.
Health Technology Assessment 2000;4(21):1–237.
Oyibo 2001
Oyibo SO, Jude EB, Tarawneh I, Nguyen HC, Harkless
LB, Boulton AJ. A comparison of two diabetic foot ulcer
classification systems: the Wagner and the University of
Texas wound classification systems. Diabetes Care 2001;24
(1):84–8.
Pecoraro 1990
Pecoraro RE, Reiber GE, Burgess EM. Pathways to diabetic
limb amputation: basis for prevention. Diabetes Care 1990;
13:513–21.
Pound 2005
Pound N, Chipchase S, Treece K, Game F, Jeffcoate W.
Ulcer-free survival following management of foot ulcers in
diabetes. Diabetic Medicine 2005;22(10):1306–9.
Reiber 1996
Reiber G. The epidemiology of diabetic foot problems.
Diabetic Medicine 1996;13S:S6–11.
Reiber 1999
Reiber GE, Vileikyte L, Boyko EJ, del Aguila M, Smith
DG, Lavery LA, et al.Causal pathways for incident lower
extremity ulcers in patients with diabetes from two settings.
Diabetes Care 1999;22:157–62.
RevMan 2011
The Nordic Cochrane Centre. Review Manager (RevMan).
Version 5.1.. Copenhagen: The Nordic Cochrane Centre,
The Cochrane Collaboration 2011.
Schaper 2004
Schaper NC. Diabetic foot ulcer classification system for
research purposes: a progress report on criteria for including
patients in research studies. Diabetes Metabolism and
Research Review 2004;20(S1):S90–5.
Schulz 2010
Schulz KF, Altman DG, Moher D, CONSORT Group.
CONSORT 2010 statement: updated guidelines for
reporting parallel group randomised trials. PLoS Medicine
2010;7(3):e1000251.
SIGN 2009
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN). Search
filters. http://www.sign.ac.uk/methodology/filters.html#
random (accessed 14 July 2009).
Singh 2005
Singh N, Armstrong DG, Lipsky BA. Preventing foot ulcers
in patients with diabetes. JAMA 2005;293:217–28.
Smith 2003
Smith J. A national survey of podiatry practice in the
treatment of diabetic foot ulcers. Unpublished.
Spencer 2000
Spencer S. Pressure relieving interventions for preventing
and treating diabetic foot ulcers. Cochrane Database
of Systematic Reviews 2000, Issue 3. [DOI: 10.1002/
14651858.CD002302]
Steed 2006
Steed DL, Attinger C, Colaizzi T, Crossland M, Franz M,
Harkless L, et al.Guidelines for the treatment of diabetic
ulcers. Wound Repair and Regeneration 2006;14(6):680–92.
Tesfaye 1996
Tesfaye S, Stephens L, Stephenson J, Fuller J, Platter ME,
Ionescu-Tirgoviste C, et al.The prevalence of diabetic
neuropathy and its relationship to glycaemic control
and potential risk factors: The EURODIAB IDDM
complications study. Diabetalogia 1996;39:1377–84.
Tierney 2007
Tierney JF, Stewart LA, Ghersi D, Burdett S, Sydes MR.
Practical methods for incorporating summary time-to-event
data into meta-analysis. Trials 2007;7(8):16.
Van Gils 1999
Van Gils C, Wheeler LA, Mellsrom M, Brinton EA, Mason
S, Wheeler CG. Amputation prevention by vascular surgery
and podiatry collaboration in high risk diabetic and nondiabetic patients - the operation desert foot experience.
Diabetes Care 1999;22(5):678–83.
Wagner 1981
Wagner FW. The dysvascular foot: a system of diagnosis
and treatment. Foot and Ankle 1981;2:64–122.
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 28
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Wild 2004
Wild S. Global prevalence of diabetes estimates for the year
2000 and projections for 2030. Diabetes Care 2004;27(5):
1047–53.
Winter 1963
Winter GD, Scales JT. Effect of air drying and dressings on
the surface of a wound. Nature 1963;197:91.
Wrobel 2001
Wrobel JS, Mayfield JA, Reiber GE. Geographic variation of
lower limb extremity major amputation in individuals with
and without diabetes in the Medicare population. Diabetes
Care 2001;24:860–4.
References to other published versions of this review
Gottrup 2002, 23-25 May
Gottrup F, Hahn TW, Thomsen JK. Cost-effectiveness of
hydrogel treatment in diabetic foot ulcers. 12th Conference
of the European Wound Management Association.
Granada, Spain, 2002, 23–25 May.
∗
Indicates the major publication for the study
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 29
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S O F S T U D I E S
Characteristics of included studies [ordered by study ID]
D’Hemecourt 1998
Methods Multi-centred (10 sites), 3-arm RCT comparing good wound care with good wound care
and sodium carboxymethylcellulose aqueous hydrogel (NaCMC hydrogel) and good
wound care and becaplermin gel; undertaken in USA
Duration of follow up: until wound healing or 20 weeks if not healed
Participants 172 patients
Inclusion criteria: patients of 19 years of age or older with type 1 or type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Patients with at least one full thickness (stage 3 or 4), chronic diabetic foot
ulcer present for at least 8 weeks prior to the study. A target area between 1.0 and 10
cm2 was required. Transcutaneous oxygen tension (TcPO2) on the limb with the target
ulcer had to be ≥ 30 mm Hg
Exclusion criteria: osteomyelitis affecting the area of the target ulcer was present. After
debridement, the target ulcer area measured was < 1 cm2 or > 10 cm2
. Patients having
more than 3 chronic ulcers present at baseline. Patients with ulcers resulting from any
cause other than diabetes or patients with cancer at the time of enrolment were excluded.
Patients on concomitant medications known to affect wound healing. Women who were
pregnant or nursing, or of childbearing potential and not using an acceptable method
of birth control were also excluded
Interventions Group A (n = 70): good wound care (daily wet-to-moist saline dressing changes every
12 hours, sharp debridement of the ulcer when deemed necessary by the investigator,
systemic control of infection if present, and off-loading of pressure) and NaCMC hydrogel. A thin layer was applied daily for morning dressing change for 20 weeks or until
ulcers healed
Group B (n = 68): good wound care
Group C (n = 34): good wound care and becaplermin gel (100 µg/g). A thin layer was
applied daily for morning dressing change for 20 weeks or until ulcers healed
Co-intervention: off-loading and systemic control of infection
No brand details provided for any intervention
Outcomes Primary outcome: ulcer healing (number of ulcers healed; time to complete healing)
Secondary outcomes: adverse events (wound-related; pain reported as adverse event)
Health-related quality of life; amputation; costs and ulcer recurrence not reported
Notes Trial data: Analysis 4.1
Funding source: not reported
Risk of bias
Bias Authors’ judgement Support for judgement
Random sequence generation (selection
bias)
Unclear risk Quote: “Patients were randomly assigned
in a 2:2:1 ratio to one of three treatment
groups.”
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 30
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
D’Hemecourt 1998 (Continued)
Comment: method of generation of random schedule not reported
Allocation concealment (selection bias) Unclear risk Comment: not stated
Blinding of participants and personnel
(performance bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk Quote: “both the NaCMC gel and becaplermin gel treatment groups were conducted in double blind fashion; the group
receiving good wound care alone was
blinded to the investigator by a third party.
”
Comment: insufficient information to
judge if the participants were blinded
Blinding of outcome assessment (detection
bias)
All outcomes
Low risk Quote: “evaluator blinded”
Comment: outcome assessors were blinded
Incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
All outcomes
Low risk Quote: “...41 (24%) of study participants
withdrawn from the study...” “The intention to treat population was the primary
population for analysis”
Comment: the presentation of data and the
methods outlined suggest that an ITT analysis was done considering all randomised
participants in the denominator
Selective reporting (reporting bias) Low risk Comment: based on paper only, protocol
not obtained
Other bias Unclear risk Comment: some baseline differences in
groups of interest for ulcer depth and duration. However, these baseline data were
only presented for 24 participants so risk
has been classed unclear
Funding source was not reported
Jensen 1998
Methods Single-centre, 2-arm RCT comparing a hydrogel dressing with a standard wet-to-moist
saline dressing undertaken in the USA. Duration of follow up: until ulcer healing or up
to 16 weeks if healing did not occur
Participants 31 participants
Inclusion criteria: no signs of infection in the ulcer or the peri-wound tissue. Diabetic
foot ulcer measuring at least 1 cm diameter, diabetic patients with foot ulcers of Wagner
grade 2 defined as full thickness into subcutaneous tissue but not involving tendon,
joint capsule or bone, having palpable pulse and willingness to comply to the treatment.
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 31
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Jensen 1998 (Continued)
Documented blood supply consistent with the ability to heal (no further information or
measures provided), willingness to comply with protocol instructions.
Exclusion criteria: not reported
Interventions Group A (n = 14): hydrogel dressing (Carrington Laboratories, Inc). An 1/8 to 1/4 inch
layer of hydrogel dressing applied over the entire surface of wound
Group B (n = 17): gauze pad soaked in sterile saline. The saline-moist gauze was moistened as needed
In both groups the wound was cleansed with ULTRAKLENZ wound cleanser, and the
trial dressings were covered with a gauze pad, wrapped with a Kling bandage and secured
with tape. Dressings were bandaged daily.
Co-intervention: all participants were initially treated with sharp debridement to remove
all non-viable tissue in and around the ulcer. All received custom made healing sandals.
Instructions were given on the importance of weight distribution and offloading of the
ulcer
Outcomes Primary outcome: ulcer healing (number of ulcers healed; average time to close)
Secondary outcomes: amputation; adverse events; costs
Health-related quality of life and ulcer recurrence not reported
Notes Trial data: Analysis 4.1
Funding source: Carrington Laboratories, Inc.
Risk of bias
Bias Authors’ judgement Support for judgement
Random sequence generation (selection
bias)
Unclear risk Quote: “The patients were then randomised to receive one of the following
daily protocols for the study period of up
to 16 weeks.”
Comment: method of generation of random schedule not reported
Allocation concealment (selection bias) Unclear risk Comment: the process of randomising participants, including who did this is not reported
Blinding of participants and personnel
(performance bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk Comment: no mention of blinding in study
report
Blinding of outcome assessment (detection
bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk Comment: no mention of blinding in study
report
Incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk Comment: in total 5 patients (of the total
31, 16%) were excluded post-randomisation. However, it is unclear from the study
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 32
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Jensen 1998 (Continued)
report what data were included in the analysis
Selective reporting (reporting bias) Low risk Comment: based on study report, protocol
not obtained
Other bias Unclear risk Comment: funded by commercial organisation. No baseline data reported. The report states that “wound chronicity could
not be adequately determined for all patients, where data were available the average ulcer duration was longer in the hydrogel group (8.9 months) than in the saline
control group (3 months)”. It is important
to note that these data are NOT complete
and so can not be used to inform the interpretation of findings
Markevich 2000
Methods Multi-centred, 2-arm RCT comparing a hydrogel dressing with the use of larval therapy.
The study was of 30 months duration but patient follow up was reported as 10 days
Participants 140 patients
Inclusion and exclusion criteria not stated. Mean age reported as 53.6 +/- 15.4 years
Group A: 15.14 cm2
Group B: 14.9 cm2
Interventions Group A (n = 70): hydrogel (no data on brand of hydrogel or on frequency of dressing
change)
Group B (n = 70): larvae of the green-bottle fly Lucilia sericata (larval therapy) for 72
hrs. Absorbent dressings were used over the larvae and were changed as required
Outcomes Primary outcome: ulcer healing (number of ulcers healed at 10 days; % patients with
granulation tissue covering over 50% of wound; proportion of patients with more than
a 50% reduction in wound area)
Secondary outcomes: not reported
Notes Trial data: Analysis 4.1
Very short follow-up data presented
Conference abstract only
Funding source: not reported
Risk of bias
Bias Authors’ judgement Support for judgement
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 33
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Markevich 2000 (Continued)
Random sequence generation (selection
bias)
Unclear risk Comment: published abstract only -
method of generation of random schedule
not reported. Does however state that patients were “randomly assigned” to treatment with maggots or hydrogel
Allocation concealment (selection bias) Unclear risk Comment: published abstract only - no details in the text
Blinding of participants and personnel
(performance bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk Comment: reported as double-blind but
no details in the published abstract to
judge if the participants and personnel were
blinded
Blinding of outcome assessment (detection
bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk Comment: reported as double-blind but no
details in the published abstract to judge if
the outcome assessors were blinded
Incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk Comment: published abstract only - unable
to assess incomplete outcome data
Selective reporting (reporting bias) Unclear risk Comment: published abstract only - unable
to assess selective outcome reporting
Other bias Unclear risk Comment: published abstract only. Baseline measures were reported as being balanced at baseline but only baseline mean
surfaces areas were reported
Vandeputte 1997
Methods Two-arm RCT, comparing hydrogel dressing with dry gauze undertaken in Belgium.
The maximum duration of follow up was 12 weeks (3 months)
Participants 29 participants (30 wounds)
Inclusion criteria: any patient who was diabetic and had wound on his foot (neuropathic
or not) was included in the trial Necrotic and infected wounds and patients who already
had amputated toe were not excluded
Exclusion criteria: patients receiving systemic antibiotics
Interventions Group A (n = 15): hydrogel dressing (Elasto gel with 65% glycerol, 17.5% water and
17.5% polyacrylamide) and wounds cleansed with a dermal wound cleanser
Group B (n = 14): dry gauze change twice a day and irrigated with chlorhexidine (0.
05% solution)
We assumed that the dermal cleanser noted was also chlorhexidine
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 34
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Vandeputte 1997 (Continued)
Outcomes Primary outcome: ulcer healing (number of ulcers healed)
Secondary outcomes: adverse events (infective complications)
Health-related quality of life; amputation; costs; and ulcer recurrence not reported
Notes Trial data: Analysis 4.1
Funding source: not reported
Risk of bias
Bias Authors’ judgement Support for judgement
Random sequence generation (selection
bias)
Unclear risk Quote: “patients were allocated to treatment groups according to a pre-prepared
randomisation listing.” Comment: method
of generation of random schedule not reported
Allocation concealment (selection bias) Unclear risk Comment: not stated
Blinding of participants and personnel
(performance bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk Comment: not stated
Blinding of outcome assessment (detection
bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk Quote: “At each dressing change, the state
of the ulcer and surrounding skin was assessed and the nurse also observed the ease
of removal and application of dressing.
The wounds were photographed every four
weeks”
Comment: Not clear who assessed the
wounds for healing..
Incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk Methods and Results sections report control group as n = 14. Results section states:
“two patients in the control group died?”
Comment: information insufficient to
judge concerning patients death in control
group
Selective reporting (reporting bias) Low risk Nine parameters pre-specified in the Methods section were reported in results
Other bias Unclear risk Comment: baseline data like mean ulcer
area not reported. Hence, insufficient information to assess if any important source
of bias exists. Unclear if participant with
more than one wound that was followed
without taking this lack of independence
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 35
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Vandeputte 1997 (Continued)
into account in the analysis
Whalley 2001
Methods Multi-centred, 2-arm RCT comparing the effectiveness of two hydrogels Purilon gel and
IntraSite gel undertaken in multiple countries: Spain, UK, Lithuania and Belgium. The
duration of follow up was for a minimum of 4 weeks until healing or for a maximum
10 weeks
Participants 74 patients; (66 patients evaluated) no further data available
Inclusion criteria: neuropathic foot ulcer, Wagner grade 1 or 2
Exclusion criteria: not stated
Interventions Group A: Purilon gel (Coloplast A/S)
Group B: IntraSite gel (Smith & Nephew)
Co-intervention: dressings changed every second day. All patients had appropriate offloading. Weekly assessment of ulcer area, peri-ulcer skin reactions, inflammation/infection of peri-ulcer skin and patient comfort. Biatain non-adhesive dressing used as a secondary dressing
Outcomes Primary outcome: ulcer healing (% ulcers healed at 10 weeks; change in mean wound
area; average time to 75% reduction in wound area)
Secondary outcomes: costs (description)
Amputation; adverse events; health-related quality of life and ulcer recurrence not reported
Notes Trial data: Analysis 4.1
Conference abstract only
Funding source: not reported
Risk of bias
Bias Authors’ judgement Support for judgement
Random sequence generation (selection
bias)
Unclear risk Comment: published
abstract only. Method of generation of random schedule not reported. The abstract
does state that participants were ’recruited
and randomised to Purilon Gel or Intrasite.
..’
Allocation concealment (selection bias) Unclear risk Comment: published abstract only - no details in the text
Blinding of participants and personnel
(performance bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk Comment: published abstract only - blinding not reported
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 36
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Whalley 2001 (Continued)
Blinding of outcome assessment (detection
bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk Comment: published abstract only - blinding not reported
Incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
All outcomes
Unclear risk Comment: reports that “66 patients were
evaluated out of 74 randomised”. Not clear
if intention-to-treat analysis conducted
Selective reporting (reporting bias) Unclear risk Comment: published abstract only - unable
to assess incomplete outcome data
Other bias Unclear risk Comment: published abstract only - unable
to assess other risk of bias
Characteristics of excluded studies [ordered by study ID]
Study Reason for exclusion
Agas 2006 Study did not randomise participants
Ahroni 1993 The dressing groups evaluated in this study were not hydrogel dressings
Altman 1993 No single, identifiable dressing type evaluated
Alvarez 2003 The dressing groups evaluated in this study were not hydrogel dressings
Apelqvist 1990 Relevant outcome data are not reported: study outcome was limited to change in size of necrotic material
on the wound. Study authors were unable to provide the original healing outcome data
Apelqvist 1996 No single, identifiable dressing type evaluated
Apelqvist 2004 No single, identifiable dressing type evaluated
Armstrong 2004 No single, identifiable dressing type evaluated
Baker 1993 The dressing groups evaluated in this study were not hydrogel dressings
Belcaro 2010 The dressing groups evaluated in this study were not hydrogel dressings
Blackman 1994 The dressing groups evaluated in this study were not hydrogel dressings
Bogaert 2004 Study did not randomise participants
Bradshaw 1989 Trial stopped after recruiting six participants. No data presented. Authors not contacted for healing data
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 37
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
(Continued)
Caravaggi 2003 Other intervention, not dressings, differs between trial arms
Chang 2000 Study did not include diabetic foot ulcers
Chauhan 2003 Other intervention, not dressings, differ between trial arms
Chirwa 2010 Study did not randomise participants
Clever 1995 The dressing groups evaluated in this study were not hydrogel dressings
Cuevas 2007 No single, identifiable dressing type evaluated
Dash 2009 Other intervention, not dressings, differ between trial arms
Diehm 2005 Study did not randomise participants
Donaghue 1998 The dressing groups evaluated in this study were not hydrogel dressings
Driver 2006 Other intervention, not dressings, differs between trial arms
Edmonds 2009 Other intervention, not dressings, differs between trial arms
Eginton 2003 No single, identifiable dressing type evaluated
Etoz 2003 Study did not randomise participants
Farac 1999 Author contacted: study not suitable for inclusion due to data quality issues
Foo 2004 The dressing groups evaluated in this study were not hydrogel dressings
Foster 1994 The dressing groups evaluated in this study were not hydrogel dressings
Foster 1999 Other intervention, not dressings, differs between trial arms
Gao 2007 Other intervention, not dressings, differs between trial arms
Gentzkow 1996 Other intervention, not dressings, differs between trial arms
Gottrup 2011 The dressing groups evaluated in this study were not hydrogel dressings
Hanft 2002 Other intervention, not dressings, differs between trial arms
Jeffcoate 2009 The dressing groups evaluated in this study were not hydrogel dressings
Jeffery 2008 Study did not randomise participants
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 38
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
(Continued)
Jude 2007 The dressing groups evaluated in this study were not hydrogel dressings
Kordestani 2008 The dressing groups evaluated in this study were not hydrogel dressings
Lalau 2002 The dressing groups evaluated in this study were not hydrogel dressings
Landsman 2010 Other intervention, not dressings, differs between trial arms
Lazaro-Martinez 2007 No single, identifiable dressing type evaluated
Lipkin 2003 Other intervention, not dressings, differs between trial arms
Marston 2001 Other intervention, not dressings, differs between trial arms
Mazzone 1993 The dressing groups evaluated in this study were not hydrogel dressings
McCallon 2000 Study did not randomise participants
Mody 2008 Study did not include diabetic foot ulcers
Moretti 2009 Other intervention, not dressings, differs between trial arms
Mueller 1989 Other intervention, not dressings, differs between trial arms
Mulder 1994 Required further data specific to diabetic foot ulcers. Unablet o obtain
Munter 2006 The dressing groups evaluated in this study were not hydrogel dressings
Novinscak 2010 No homogenous dressing group evaluated
Ogce 2007 The dressing groups evaluated in this study were not hydrogel dressings
Palao i Domenech 2008 The dressing groups evaluated in this study were not hydrogel dressings
Parish 2009 Other intervention, not dressings, differs between trial arms
Pham 1999 Other intervention, not dressings, differs between trial arms
Piaggesi 1997 Study did not randomise participants
Piaggesi 2001 The dressing groups evaluated in this study were not hydrogel dressings
Reyzelman 2009 No single, identifiable dressing type evaluated
Roberts 2001 The dressing groups evaluated in this study were not hydrogel dressings
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 39
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
(Continued)
Robson 2005 Other intervention, not dressings, differs between trial arms
Robson 2009 Study did not include diabetic foot ulcers
Sabolinski 2000 Other intervention, not dressings, differs between trial arms
Sabolinski 2001 Other intervention, not dressings, differs between trial arms
Shaw 2010 Other intervention, not dressings, differs between trial arms
Shukrimi 2008 Other intervention, not dressings, differs between trial arms
Sibbald 2011 The dressing groups evaluated in this study were not hydrogel dressings
Solway 2011 Study did not randomise participants
Steed 1992 Other intervention, not dressings, differs between trial arms
Steed 1995 Other intervention, not dressings, differs between trial arms
Steed 1996 Other intervention, not dressings, differs between trial arms
Subrahmanyam 1993 The dressing groups evaluated in this study were not hydrogel dressings
Trial 2010 The dressing groups evaluated in this study were not hydrogel dressings
Turns 2012 Other intervention, not dressings
Urbaneie 1999 No homogenous dressing group evaluated
Varma 2006 No homogenous dressing group evaluated
Veves 2001 Other intervention, not dressings, differs between trial arms
Veves 2002 The dressing groups evaluated in this study were not hydrogel dressings
Woo 2010 The dressing groups evaluated in this study were not hydrogel dressings
Yao 2007 Other intervention, not dressings, differs between trial arms
Zimny 2003 Other intervention, not dressings, differs between trial arms
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 40
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Characteristics of studies awaiting assessment [ordered by study ID]
Wang 2012
Methods RCT?
Participants People with diabetes and foot ulcers
Interventions Topical bismuth subgallate/borneol (Suile) dressing compared with hydrogel
Outcomes Unsure
Notes Awaiting retrieval and translation
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 41
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
D A T A A N D A N A L Y S E S
Comparison 1. Hydrogel dressing compared with larval therapy
Outcome or subgroup title
No. of
studies
No. of
participants Statistical method Effect size
1 Number of ulcers healed 1 Risk Ratio (M-H, Random, 95% CI) Subtotals only
Comparison 2. Hydrogel dressing compared with platelet-derived growth factor
Outcome or subgroup title
No. of
studies
No. of
participants Statistical method Effect size
1 Number of ulcers healed 1 Risk Ratio (M-H, Fixed, 95% CI) Subtotals only
Comparison 3. Hydrogel dressing compared with basic wound contact dressing
Outcome or subgroup title
No. of
studies
No. of
participants Statistical method Effect size
1 Number of ulcers healed 3 198 Risk Ratio (M-H, Fixed, 95% CI) 1.80 [1.27, 2.56]
2 Adverse events 2 Risk Ratio (M-H, Fixed, 95% CI) Subtotals only
3 Quality of life 1 Risk Ratio (M-H, Fixed, 95% CI) Subtotals only
Comparison 4. Trial data
Outcome or subgroup title
No. of
studies
No. of
participants Statistical method Effect size
1 Trial data Other data No numeric data
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 42
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Analysis 1.1. Comparison 1 Hydrogel dressing compared with larval therapy, Outcome 1 Number of ulcers
healed.
Review: Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers
Comparison: 1 Hydrogel dressing compared with larval therapy
Outcome: 1 Number of ulcers healed
Study or subgroup Hydrogel dressing Larval therapy Risk Ratio Risk Ratio
n/N n/N
MH,Random,95%
CI
MH,Random,95%
CI
Markevich 2000 2/70 5/70 0.40 [ 0.08, 1.99 ]
Subtotal (95% CI) 0 0 0.0 [ 0.0, 0.0 ]
Total events: 2 (Hydrogel dressing), 5 (Larval therapy)
Heterogeneity: not applicable
Test for overall effect: Z = 0.0 (P < 0.00001)
Test for subgroup differences: Not applicable
0.01 0.1 1 10 100
Favours larval therapy Favours hydrogel dressing
Analysis 2.1. Comparison 2 Hydrogel dressing compared with platelet-derived growth factor, Outcome 1
Number of ulcers healed.
Review: Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers
Comparison: 2 Hydrogel dressing compared with platelet-derived growth factor
Outcome: 1 Number of ulcers healed
Study or subgroup Hydrogel Growth factor Risk Ratio Risk Ratio
n/N n/N M-H,Fixed,95% CI M-H,Fixed,95% CI
D’Hemecourt 1998 25/70 15/34 0.81 [ 0.50, 1.32 ]
Subtotal (95% CI) 0 0 0.0 [ 0.0, 0.0 ]
Total events: 25 (Hydrogel), 15 (Growth factor)
Heterogeneity: not applicable
Test for overall effect: Z = 0.0 (P < 0.00001)
Test for subgroup differences: Not applicable
0.01 0.1 1 10 100
Favours growth factor Favours hydrogel
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 43
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Analysis 3.1. Comparison 3 Hydrogel dressing compared with basic wound contact dressing, Outcome 1
Number of ulcers healed.
Review: Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers
Comparison: 3 Hydrogel dressing compared with basic wound contact dressing
Outcome: 1 Number of ulcers healed
Study or subgroup Hydrogel Basic wound contact Risk Ratio Weight Risk Ratio
n/N n/N M-H,Fixed,95% CI M-H,Fixed,95% CI
D’Hemecourt 1998 25/70 15/68 54.6 % 1.62 [ 0.94, 2.80 ]
Jensen 1998 11/14 6/17 19.4 % 2.23 [ 1.11, 4.48 ]
Vandeputte 1997 14/15 7/14 26.0 % 1.87 [ 1.09, 3.21 ]
Total (95% CI) 99 99 100.0 % 1.80 [ 1.27, 2.56 ]
Total events: 50 (Hydrogel), 28 (Basic wound contact)
Heterogeneity: Chi2 = 0.52, df = 2 (P = 0.77); I2 =0.0%
Test for overall effect: Z = 3.29 (P = 0.0010)
Test for subgroup differences: Not applicable
0.01 0.1 1 10 100
Favours basic wound Favours hydrogel
Analysis 3.2. Comparison 3 Hydrogel dressing compared with basic wound contact dressing, Outcome 2
Adverse events.
Review: Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers
Comparison: 3 Hydrogel dressing compared with basic wound contact dressing
Outcome: 2 Adverse events
Study or subgroup Hydrogel Basic wound contact Risk Ratio Risk Ratio
n/N n/N M-H,Fixed,95% CI M-H,Fixed,95% CI
Vandeputte 1997 1/14 7/14 0.14 [ 0.02, 1.01 ]
D’Hemecourt 1998 19/70 25/68 0.74 [ 0.45, 1.21 ]
Subtotal (95% CI) 0 0 0.0 [ 0.0, 0.0 ]
Total events: 20 (Hydrogel), 32 (Basic wound contact)
Heterogeneity: Chi2 = 0.0, df = 0 (P<0.00001); I2 =0.0%
Test for overall effect: Z = 0.0 (P < 0.00001)
Test for subgroup differences: Not applicable
0.001 0.01 0.1 1 10 100 1000
Favours hydrogel Favours basic wound
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 44
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Analysis 3.3. Comparison 3 Hydrogel dressing compared with basic wound contact dressing, Outcome 3
Quality of life.
Review: Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers
Comparison: 3 Hydrogel dressing compared with basic wound contact dressing
Outcome: 3 Quality of life
Study or subgroup Hydrogel Basic wound contact Risk Ratio Risk Ratio
n/N n/N M-H,Fixed,95% CI M-H,Fixed,95% CI
D’Hemecourt 1998 11/70 10/68 1.07 [ 0.49, 2.35 ]
Subtotal (95% CI) 0 0 0.0 [ 0.0, 0.0 ]
Total events: 11 (Hydrogel), 10 (Basic wound contact)
Heterogeneity: not applicable
Test for overall effect: Z = 0.0 (P < 0.00001)
Test for subgroup differences: Not applicable
0.01 0.1 1 10 100
Favours hydrogel Favours basic wound
Analysis 4.1. Comparison 4 Trial data, Outcome 1 Trial data.
Trial data
Study Groups Primary outcome: ulcer
healing
Secondary:
healthrelated quality of life
Number and
level of amputations
Adverse
events, including pain
Cost Ulcer recurrence
D’Hemecourt
1998
Group A (n
= 70): good
wound care
and NaCMC
gel
Group B (n
= 68): good
wound care
Group C (n =
34)
: good wound
Number of ulcers healed:
Group A: 25/
70
Group B: 15/
68
Group C: 15/
34
Time to complete healing
(days):
n/r n/r Wound related:
Group A: 19/
70
Group B: 25/
68
Group C: 7/
34
Pain
reported as adverse event:
n/r n/r
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 45
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Trial data (Continued)
care and becaplermin gel
(100 µg/g)
Group A: 98*
Group B:
141*
Group C: 85*
*It is unclear if
these are mean
or median
times to healing. Although
a life plot table
presented suggests that median time
to healing was
not reached in
any group. Explained by the
very short follow-up time of
this trial - 10
days
Group A: 11/
70
Group B: 10/
68
Group C: 2/
34
Jensen 1998 Group A (n =
14): hydrogel
dressing
Group B (n =
17): gauze pad
soaked in sterile saline
Number of ulcers healed:
Group A: 11
Group B: 6
Average time to
close (weeks):
Group A: 10.
30
Group B: 11.
69
n/r Amputation:
Group A: 0
Group B: 1
Group A: cellulitis = 2; hospitalised for
non study-related dehydration = 1
Group B: partial amputation = 1; increased eschar
formation = 2;
cellulitis = 1
Cost in US dollars/day/group
including nursing time and
cost of products
used, it is not
clear if this is
per patient):
Group A: $7.
01 per day
Group B: $12.
28 per day
n/r
Markevich
2000
Group A (n
= 70): hydrogel (no data on
brand)
Group B (n =
70): larvae of
the green-bottle fly Lucilia
sericata (larval
therapy)
Number of ulcers healed at
10 days:
Group A: 2/70
Group B: 5/70
Proportion of patients
with granulation tissue covering over 50%
of
wound (numbers not supn/r n/r n/r n/r n/r
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 46
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Trial data (Continued)
plied)
Group A: 34%
Group B :
60%
Proportion of patients
with more than
a 50% reduction in wound
area (numbers
not supplied)
Group A: 27%
Group B :
51%
Vandeputte
1997
Group A (n =
15): hydrogel
dressing (Elasto gel
with
65% glycerol,
17.5%
water and 17.
5% polyacrylamide) and
wounds
cleansed with
a
dermal wound
cleanser
Group B (n =
14): dry gauze
change twice a
day and irrigated
with chlorhexidine (0.05%
solution)
Number of ulcers healed:
Group A: 14/
15
Group B: 7/14
n/r n/r Infective complications
Group A: 1/15
Group B: 7/14
Two participants in the
control group
died
n/r n/r
Whalley 2001 Group A:
Purilion gel
Group B: IntraSite gel
Percentage
of ulcers healed
at 10 weeks
(numbers not
presented):
Group A:
35%
Group B: 19%
Change in
mean wound
Direct cost associated with
wound treatment to reach
75% reduction in wound
area was 32%
lower for patients treated
with Purilion
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 47
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Trial data (Continued)
area
Group A: 2.
5 cm2
(SD 3.
2) to 0.6 cm2
(SD 1.1)
Group B: 2.
4 cm2
(SD 2.
9) to 1.0 cm2
(SD 1.8)
Average time to
75% reduction
in wound area
(days):
Group A: 35
days
Group B: 46
days
gel
A D D I T I O N A L T A B L E S
Table 1. Summary of studies
First author Group A Group B Group C Duration of follow
up
% healed data
D’Hemecourt 1998 Good wound care
and NaCMC gel; a
thin layer was applied daily
for morning dressing change for 20
weeks or until ulcers
healed
No brand information
Good wound care
(daily wet-to-moist
saline
dressing changes every 12 hours, sharp
debridement of the
ulcer when deemed
necessary by the investigator, systemic
control of infection
if present, and offloading of pressure)
No brand information
Good wound care
and becaplermin gel
(100 µg/g)
20 weeks Yes
Jensen 1998 Hydrogel dressing
(Carrington Laboratories, Inc)
Gauze pad soaked in
sterile saline
16 weeks Yes
Markevich 2000 Hydrogel (no data
on brand of hydrogel)
Larvae of the greenbottle fly Lucilia sericata (larval therapy)
10 days Yes
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 48
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Table 1. Summary of studies (Continued)
. Absorbent dressings were used over
the larvae and were
changed as required
Vandeputte 1997 Hydrogel dressing (Elasto gel with
65% glycerol, 17.
5% water and 17.
5% polyacrylamide)
Dry gauze twice a
day
12 weeks Yes
Whalley 2001 Purilon gel (Coloplast A/S)
IntraSite Gel (S&N
Hlth)
10 weeks Yes
A P P E N D I C E S
Appendix 1. Search methods used in the original version of this review - June 2011
Electronic searches
We searched the following databases:
• the Cochrane Wounds Group Specialised Register (searched 10 June 2011);
• the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) (The Cochrane Library 2011, Issue 2);
• Ovid MEDLINE (1950 to June Week 1 2011);
• Ovid MEDLINE (In-Process & Other Non-Indexed Citations, June 8, 2011);
• Ovid EMBASE (1980 to 2011 Week 22); and
• EBSCO CINAHL (1982 to 3 June 2011).
We searched the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) using the following exploded MeSH headings and
keywords:
#1 MeSH descriptor Occlusive Dressings explode all trees
#2 MeSH descriptor Biological Dressings explode all trees
#3 MeSH descriptor Alginates explode all trees
#4 MeSH descriptor Hydrogels explode all trees
#5 MeSH descriptor Silver explode all trees
#6 MeSH descriptor Honey explode all trees
#7 (dressing* or alginate* or hydrogel* or “foam” or “bead” or “film” or “films” or tulle or gauze or non-adherent or “non adherent” or
silver or honey or matrix):ti,ab,kw
#8 (#1 OR #2 OR #3 OR #4 OR #5 OR #6 OR #7)
#9 MeSH descriptor Foot Ulcer explode all trees
#10 MeSH descriptor Diabetic Foot explode all trees
#11 diabet* NEAR/3 ulcer*:ti,ab,kw
#12 diabet* NEAR/3 (foot or feet):ti,ab,kw
#13 diabet* NEAR/3 wound*:ti,ab,kw
#14 (#9 OR #10 OR #11 OR #12 OR #13)
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 49
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
#15 (#8 AND #14)
We adapted this strategy to search Ovid MEDLINE, Ovid EMBASE and EBSCO CINAHL. We combined the Ovid MEDLINE
search with the Cochrane Highly Sensitive Search Strategy for identifying randomised trials in MEDLINE: sensitivity- and precisionmaximising version (2008 revision). We combined the EMBASE and CINAHL searches with the trial filters developed by the Scottish
Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. There were no restrictions on the basis of date or language of publication.
Searching other resources
We attempted to contact researchers to obtain any unpublished data when needed. We also searched the reference lists of the included
studies and previous systematic reviews. We contacted appropriate manufacturers (Smith & Nephew, Convatec Ltd, Mölnlycke Health
Care, 3M Healthcare, Coloplast Ltd) for details of any unpublished studies. We also checked for ongoing studies in the ISRCTN
register.
Appendix 2. Risk of bias criteria
1. Was the allocation sequence randomly generated?
Low risk of bias
The investigators describe a random component in the sequence generation process such as: referring to a random number table; using
a computer random number generator; coin tossing; shuffling cards or envelopes; throwing dice; drawing of lots.
High risk of bias
The investigators describe a non-random component in the sequence generation process. Usually, the description would involve some
systematic, non-random approach, for example: sequence generated by odd or even date of birth; sequence generated by some rule
based on date (or day) of admission; sequence generated by some rule based on hospital or clinic record number.
Unclear
Insufficient information about the sequence generation process to permit judgement of low or high risk of bias.
2. Was the treatment allocation adequately concealed?
Low risk of bias
Participants and investigators enrolling participants could not foresee assignment because one of the following, or an equivalent
method, was used to conceal allocation: central allocation (including telephone, web-based and pharmacy-controlled randomisation);
sequentially-numbered drug containers of identical appearance; sequentially-numbered, opaque, sealed envelopes.
High risk of bias
Participants or investigators enrolling participants could possibly foresee assignments and thus introduce selection bias, such as allocation
based on: using an open random allocation schedule (e.g. a list of random numbers); assignment envelopes were used without appropriate
safeguards (e.g. if envelopes were unsealed or nonopaque or not sequentially numbered); alternation or rotation; date of birth; case
record number; any other explicitly unconcealed procedure.
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 50
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Unclear
Insufficient information to permit judgement of low or high risk of bias. This is usually the case if the method of concealment is not
described or not described in sufficient detail to allow a definite judgement, for example if the use of assignment envelopes is described,
but it remains unclear whether envelopes were sequentially numbered, opaque and sealed.
3. Blinding - was knowledge of the allocated interventions adequately prevented during the study?
Low risk of bias
Any one of the following.
• No blinding, but the review authors judge that the outcome and the outcome measurement are not likely to be influenced by
lack of blinding.
• Blinding of participants and key study personnel ensured, and unlikely that the blinding could have been broken.
• Either participants or some key study personnel were not blinded, but outcome assessment was blinded and the non-blinding of
others unlikely to introduce bias.
High risk of bias
Any one of the following.
• No blinding or incomplete blinding, and the outcome or outcome measurement is likely to be influenced by lack of blinding.
• Blinding of key study participants and personnel attempted, but likely that the blinding could have been broken.
• Either participants or some key study personnel were not blinded, and the non-blinding of others likely to introduce bias.
Unclear
Any one of the following.
• Insufficient information to permit judgement of low or high risk of bias.
• The study did not address this outcome.
4. Were incomplete outcome data adequately addressed?
Low risk of bias
Any one of the following.
• No missing outcome data.
• Reasons for missing outcome data unlikely to be related to true outcome (for survival data, censoring unlikely to be introducing
bias).
• Missing outcome data balanced in numbers across intervention groups, with similar reasons for missing data across groups.
• For dichotomous outcome data, the proportion of missing outcomes compared with observed event risk not enough to have a
clinically relevant impact on the intervention effect estimate.
• For continuous outcome data, plausible effect size (difference in means or standardised difference in means) among missing
outcomes not enough to have a clinically relevant impact on observed effect size.
• Missing data have been imputed using appropriate methods.
High risk of bias
Any one of the following.
• Reason for missing outcome data likely to be related to true outcome, with either imbalance in numbers or reasons for missing
data across intervention groups.
• For dichotomous outcome data, the proportion of missing outcomes compared with observed event risk enough to induce
clinically relevant bias in intervention effect estimate.
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 51
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
• For continuous outcome data, plausible effect size (difference in means or standardised difference in means) among missing
outcomes enough to induce clinically relevant bias in observed effect size.
• ‘As-treated’ analysis done with substantial departure of the intervention received from that assigned at randomisation.
• Potentially inappropriate application of simple imputation.
Unclear
Any one of the following.
• Insufficient reporting of attrition/exclusions to permit judgement of low or high risk of bias (e.g. number randomised not stated,
no reasons for missing data provided).
• The study did not address this outcome.
5. Are reports of the study free of suggestion of selective outcome reporting?
Low risk of bias
Any of the following.
• The study protocol is available and all of the study’s pre-specified (primary and secondary) outcomes that are of interest in the
review have been reported in the pre-specified way.
• The study protocol is not available but it is clear that the published reports include all expected outcomes, including those that
were pre-specified (convincing text of this nature may be uncommon).
High risk of bias
Any one of the following.
• Not all of the study’s pre-specified primary outcomes have been reported.
• One or more primary outcomes is reported using measurements, analysis methods or subsets of the data (e.g. subscales) that
were not pre-specified.
• One or more reported primary outcomes were not pre-specified (unless clear justification for their reporting is provided, such as
an unexpected adverse effect).
• One or more outcomes of interest in the review are reported incompletely so that they cannot be entered in a meta-analysis.
• The study report fails to include results for a key outcome that would be expected to have been reported for such a study.
Unclear
Insufficient information to permit judgement of low or high risk of bias. It is likely that the majority of studies will fall into this category.
6. Other sources of potential bias
Low risk of bias
The study appears to be free of other sources of bias.
High risk of bias
There is at least one important risk of bias. For example, the study:
• had a potential source of bias related to the specific study design used; or
• had extreme baseline imbalance; or
• has been claimed to have been fraudulent; or
• had some other problem.
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 52
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Unclear
There may be a risk of bias, but there is either:
• insufficient information to assess whether an important risk of bias exists; or
• insufficient rationale or evidence that an identified problem will introduce bias.
W H A T ’ S N E W
Last assessed as up-to-date: 26 April 2013.
Date Event Description
25 June 2013 New search has been performed First update, new search, no new trials identified.
25 June 2013 New citation required but conclusions have not changed Summary of findings table included, conclusions not
changed.
C O N T R I B U T I O N S O F A U T H O R S
Jo Dumville developed the review and co-ordinated development, completed the first draft of the protocol, made an intellectual
contribution, approved the final version prior to submission and is the guarantor of the review and the update.
Susan O’Meara edited the review, made an intellectual contribution and approved the final version of the review and the update prior
to submission.
Sohan Deshpande completed the first draft of the review, made an intellectual contribution and approved the final version of the review
prior to submission.
Katharine Speak made an intellectual contribution to the review, advised on the review and approved the final version priorto submission.
Contributions of editorial base:
Nicky Cullum: edited the protocol and review; advised on methodology, interpretation and content. Approved the final review prior
to submission.
Sally Bell-Syer: co-ordinated the editorial process. Advised on methodology, interpretation and content. Edited and copy edited the
review and the update.
Ruth Foxlee: designed the search strategy and edited the search methods section.
D E C L A R A T I O N S O F I N T E R E S T
Susan O’Meara and Jo Dumville receive funding from the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) under its Programme Grants
for Applied Research programme. This review presents independent research funded by the National Institute for Health Research
(NIHR) under its Programme Grants for Applied Research programme (RP-PG-0407-10428). The views expressed in this presentation
are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of Health.
Sohan Deshpande and Katherine Speak: none declared.
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 53
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
S O U R C E S O F S U P P O R T
Internal sources
• Department of Health Sciences, University of York, UK.
External sources
• NIHR Programme Grants for Applied Research, UK.
• NIHR/Department of Health (England), Cochrane Wounds Group, UK.
I N D E X T E R M S
Medical Subject Headings (MeSH)
∗Bandages, Hydrocolloid; ∗Wound Healing; Diabetic Foot [∗drug therapy]; Hydrogel [∗
therapeutic use]; Randomized Controlled
Trials as Topic
MeSH check words
Humans
Hydrogel dressings for healing diabetic foot ulcers (Review) 54
Copyright © 2013 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.