The silver-releasing foam
dressing, Contreet Foam,
promotes faster healing of
critically colonised venous
leg ulcers: a randomised,
controlled trial
Bo Jørgensen, Patricia Price, Klaus E Andersen, Finn Gottrup, Niels BechThomsen, Elizabeth Scanlon, Robert Kirsner, Henriette Rheinen, Jytte RoedPetersen, Marco Romanelli, Gregor Jemec, David J Leaper, Martino Ha
Neumann, Joep Veraart, Stefan Coerper, Rikke H Agerslev, Susanne H
Bendz, Jan R Larsen, R Gary Sibbald
Jørgensen B, Price P, Andersen KE, Gottrup F, Bech-Thomsen N, Scanlon E, Kirsner R, Rheinen H, Roed-Petersen J,
Romanelli M, Jemec G, Leaper DJ, Neumann MHA, Veraart J, Coerper S, Agerslev RH, Bendz SH, Larsen JR, Sibbald RG.
The silver-releasing foam dressing, Contreet Foam, promotes faster healing of critically colonised venous leg ulcers: a
randomised, controlled trial. Int Wound J 2005;2:64—73.
ABSTRACT
The study compared the effect of a sustained silver-release foam dressing (Contreet Foam) with a foam dressing
(Allevyn Hydrocellular) without added silver in critically colonised venous leg ulcers with delayed healing. The
study was a multicentre, open, randomised, controlled study lasting for 4 weeks. Ulcer area and healing were
assessed weekly. Odour, maceration, absorption capacity and leakage were evaluated at dressing changes. All
adverse events were recorded. One hundred and twenty-nine patients were included (Contreet Foam: 65, Allevyn
Hydrocellular: 64). The two groups were comparable in all respects. After 4 weeks, there was a significantly
Authors: B Jørgensen, MD, Copenhagen Wound Healing Centre, Bispebjerg University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark; P Price, PhD, Wound
Healing Research Unit, Cardiff University, Cardiff Medicentre, Cardiff, UK; KE Andersen, MD, Department of Dermatology and Venerology,
Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark; F Gottrup, MD, University Center of Wound Healing, Odense University Hospital, Odense,
Denmark; N Bech-Thomsen, MD, Hudklinikken, Dehnsvej, Naestved, Denmark; E Scanlon, MSc, RN, Leeds Teaching Hospitals Trust, Leeds, UK; R
Kirsner, MD, Miami VA Medical Center, Miami, FL, USA; H Rheinen, MD, Universita¨ts Hautklinik, Freiburg, Germany; J Roed-Petersen, MD,
Department of Dermatology, Gentofte County Hospital, Gentofte, Denmark; M Romanelli, MD, PhD, Department of Dermatology, University of
Pisa, Pisa, Italy; G Jemec, MD, Department of Dermatology, Roskilde Hospital, Roskilde, Denmark; DJ Leaper, MD, Professorial Unit of Surgery,
University Hospital of North Tees, Stockton on Tees, UK; MHA Neumann, MD, PhD, Department of Dermatology & Venerology, Erasmus MC,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands; J Veraart, MD, Academisch Ziekenhuis Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands; S Coerper, MD, Chirurgische Klinik,
Eberhard-Karls-Universita¨t Tu¨bingen, Tu¨bingen, Germany; RH Agerslev, MSc, Wound Care Business Unit, Coloplast A/S, Humlebaek, Denmark;
SH Bendz, PhD, Wound Care Business Unit, Coloplast A/S, Humlebaek, Denmark; JR Larsen, MSc, Wound Care Business Unit, Coloplast A/S,
Humlebaek, Denmark; RG Sibbald, MD, Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Address for correspondence: RH Agerslev, Coloplast A/S, Holtedam 3, DK-3050 Humlebaek, Denmark
E-mail: dkrh@coloplast.com
64  Blackwell Publishing Ltd and Medicalhelplines.com Inc 2005 . International Wound Journal . Vol 2 No 1
&RESEARCH
greater reduction in ulcer area in the Contreet Foam group (45%) than in the Allevyn Hydrocellular group (25%).
After 1 and 4 weeks, odour was present in significantly less of the ulcers in the Contreet Foam group (17% and
19%, respectively) compared with the Allevyn Hydrocellular group (47% and 39%, respectively) and at the final
visit there were significantly fewer leakages in the Contreet Foam group (19%) compared with the Allevyn
Hydrocellular group (49%). Also, less maceration was observed after 1 and 4 weeks in the Contreet Foam group
(34% and 37%, respectively) compared with the Allevyn Hydrocellular group (55% and 48%, respectively). The
occurrence and cause of adverse events were equally distributed between the study groups. The present study
provides evidence of the superior performance of the silver-releasing dressing, Contreet Foam, compared with a
traditional moist foam wound healing dressing in the treatment of critically colonised, chronic venous leg ulcers.
The results of this randomised, controlled study suggest an important role of sustained silver-releasing dressings
in the treatment of critically colonised chronic wounds.
Key words: Silver dressing . Venous leg ulcers . Critical colonisation . Delayed healing . Bacteria . Randomised clinical trial
INTRODUCTION
Chronic leg ulcers are estimated to affect
13—3‰ of the adult population in the United
Kingdom at any one time (1—3). They are more
common in the elderly and as the age of the
population rises, the number of patients with
chronic leg ulcers is likely to increase. Several
studies demonstrate that patients may suffer
from leg ulcers for several years without any
real improvement (4,5). In consequence, leg
ulcers pose a substantial threat to the patients’
quality of life. The large number of patients
and the long duration of disease combined
with high costs of care suggest that chronic
leg ulcers have a large financial impact on
society (2). Studies providing new information, related to healing improvement of
chronic leg ulcers, may therefore have considerable socioeconomic impact.
It is generally accepted that wound healing
is influenced by the virulence and number of
bacteria along with host resistance (6). The
concept of critical colonisation by bacteria as
a state of increased bacterial load, falling
between colonisation and overt clinical infection, has been a topic of discussion (7—9).
However, the concept of critical colonisation is
now used by many wound experts to identify
when topical antimicrobial treatment is required
for optimal wound healing. The clinical signs of
critical colonisation are delayed healing, abnormal odour, discoloration, increased serous exudate, pain/tenderness and the presence of
friable granulation tissue (8—10).
Critically colonised (not infected) wounds
are widely treated with traditional absorbent
moist wound healing dressings. However,
antiseptic dressings introduced on the market
in recent years, such as ionic silver-containing
absorbent dressings, are believed to promote
wound healing by reducing bacterial burden
and at the same time achieving moisture balance through exudate management. Ionic
silver is incorporated into the bacterial cell
wall and bacterial DNA, thereby blocking vital
processes and cell proliferation. Several studies
have investigated the effect of silver in the treatment of venous leg ulcers and demonstrated the
safety of the products (4,11,12). However, no
comparative studies have previously been published and consequently there is no substantial
clinical evidence to document the added benefits of silver dressings compared with traditional absorbent moist wound healing
dressings in the healing of venous ulcers.
The aim of the present study was to investigate the effect of a sustained release silver
foam dressing (Contreet Foam) compared
with a foam dressing without added silver
(Allevyn Hydrocellular) on critically colonised venous leg ulcers in a randomised, controlled, clinical trial.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Protocol design and treatment
The study was designed as a multicentre,
open, block-randomised and controlled
study. Fifteen centres in seven countries participated in the study. Patients were randomised to treatment with either Contreet Foam
or Allevyn Hydrocellular by computergenerated randomisation. Patients were treated
for 4 weeks unless complete wound healing or
withdrawal occurred sooner.
Dressing change routines involved cleansing the wounds with sterile saline or tap water
and allowing the wound to dry. The dressing
was secured with either gauze or adhesive
tape. Compression therapy according to the
clinical practice of the centres was mandatory
throughout the study period and could not be
Silver-releasing foam dressing
 Blackwell Publishing Ltd and Medicalhelplines.com Inc 2005 . International Wound Journal . Vol 2 No 1 65
Key Points
. chronic leg ulcers are estimated
to affect 13% to 3% of the
population in the UK
. wound healing is influenced by
the virulence and number of bacteria along with host resistance
. critically colonised wounds are
widely treated with absorbent
moist wound healing dressings
. aim of the study is to investigate
the effect of a sustained release
silver dressing versus a hydrocellular foam dressing
changed during the study period. When
necessary, the periulcer area was treated
with either a mild zinc cream (Conveen, Coloplast A/S, Humlebaek, Denmark) or a topical
steroid ointment. The centres were asked to
leave the dressing on for as long as clinically
possible to a maximum of 7 days.
Patient selection
Patients eligible for inclusion in the study
were those with a moderately or highly exuding, chronic venous or mixed venous/arterial
leg ulcer with delayed healing process when
compared with normal expectations for the
patient. Stalled or delayed healing was
defined as no area reduction quantified as
05 cm or less over the past 4 weeks. In addition, the study ulcer had to be characterised
by at least one of the four following clinical
signs of critical colonisation (7,9,13).
. Increased exudate levels within the past
4 weeks
. Patient’s report of increased pain in the
study ulcer area within the past 4 weeks
. Discolouration of the granulation tissue
. Foul odour as assessed by the study personnel
Discoloration was defined as granulation tissue that was dark deep red, dusky or dull in
colour (7,9,13). Additional inclusion criteria
were an ankle/brachial index of at least 065
and compression therapy for 4 weeks prior to
inclusion. The ulcer dimensions at inclusion
were a minimum of 2 cm2 and a maximum
corresponding to 15 cm from the edge of the
10 · 10 cm dressing.
Exclusion criteria included the presence
of clinical infection including erysipelas
and cellulitis of periulcer skin, concomitant
treatment with antiseptics or antibiotics from
1 week prior to inclusion and throughout the study period, uncontrolled diabetes
(HbA1c > 10%), concomitant treatment with
systemic corticosteroids exceeding 10 mg/day
or other immunosuppressants from 4 weeks
prior to inclusion and diseases that may interfere with ulcer healing (e.g. vasculitis, rheumatoid arthritis or severe kidney or heart disease).
Products/materials
The Contreet Foam dressing (Coloplast) consists
of a soft hydrophilic polyurethane foam containing silver as an integral part of the matrix. The
foam is bonded to a semi-permeable polyurethane film. Silver ions are present in a form
that is readily ‘hydro-activated’ in the presence
of fluid or wound exudate. In vitro studies have
shown that silver release is sustained for up to 7
days and the release is proportional to the
amount of exudate absorbed (14).
The Allevyn Hydrocellular dressing (Smith
& Nephew, Hull, UK) is a layer of soft,
hydrophilic polyurethane foam bonded to a
semi-permeable polyurethane film. The wound
contact surface is covered with a perforated
polyurethane film.
Only dressings (10 · 10 cm) without adhesive boarders were applied and cutting of the
dressing was not permitted.
Assessments
The study personnel evaluated the patients
weekly at the clinic or hospital throughout
the study period (week 0—4). Any interweekly
dressing changes were noted, but no study
assessments took place apart from obtaining
information on the use of periulcer skin application.
Wound size was traced using transparent
wound tracing sheets and measured using
Image Pro Plus S.O software (Image House,
Copenhagen, Denmark). Odour and maceration of the periulcer area were subjectively
evaluated by the study personnel on dressing
removal. Dressing characteristics included
ease of removal, ease of application, absorption capacity and leakage. The following
health-related quality of life parameters were
estimated by the patient:
. Odour
. Influence on general well-being
. Comfort of the dressing
To investigate the influence of a venous leg
ulcer on the general well-being of the patient,
a generic EQ-5D (EUROQoL) tool was applied
(15,16). Patients filled in the questionnaire at
the onset and at termination of the study. If
the patient was unable to physically fill in the
questionnaire, this was done with the help of
the study personnel.
Finally, adverse events, including silver
staining, the occurrence of pain, blisters satellite ulcers and the status of periulcer skin were
recorded throughout the study period.
Silver-releasing foam dressing
66  Blackwell Publishing Ltd and Medicalhelplines.com Inc 2005 . International Wound Journal . Vol 2 No 1
Key Points
. patients had a chronic venous or
mixed venous/arterial leg ulcer
which was non healing
. stalled or delayed healing was
defined as no area reduction
quantified or 05cm or less over
past four weeks
. the ulcer also had one of the
classic signs of critical colonisation
. wounds were evaluated weekly
over a four week period
. a number of wound parameters
were assessed at each dressing
change
. several quality of life factors
were also assessed
Ethics
The study was conducted in accordance with
the Declaration of Helsinki ll 1964, as
amended in Scotland, October 2000 and in
accordance with Council Directive 93/42/
EEC of 14 June 1993 concerning medical
devices (commonly known as the Medical
Device Directive), the Council Directive 95/
46/EC on the protection of individuals with
regard to the processing of personal data and
the International ISO standard ISO/DIS
14155—1 : 2000 Clinical investigation of medical devices on humans. All approvals were
obtained prior to inclusion of patients.
Written informed consent was obtained
from all patients after written and verbal
information about the study, procedures,
potential risks or inconveniences and/or
expected benefits.
Statistical analysis
Double entry and data management were performed in a data management system (CDMS)
based on SAS version 612 with relevant audit
trails enabled. SAS version 82 was used for
subsequent data analysis. The level of significance was P = 005 and the following tests
were applied: Chi-square test, Wilcoxon twosample test and Kaplan—Meier analysis (log
rank test). The specific tests applied are indicated with the relevant results.
Intention-to-treat analyses were performed in
connection with the safety parameters, whereas
per protocol (PP) analyses were applied for the
performance parameters. Patients were excluded
from the PP analyses if protocol violations such
as treatment with systemic antibiotics during
treatment or non compliance with compression
therapy occurred.
RESULTS
Patient disposition and adverse reactions
Of the 129 patients included in the study, 65
were randomised to the Contreet Foam group
and 64 to the Allevyn Hydrocellular group.
The two treatment groups were comparable
for inclusion characteristics (Table 1). All
patients had wounds with clinical signs of
delayed healing, and both groups exhibited a
high incidence of previous infections in the
study ulcers within the last year: 67% in the
Contreet Foam group and 62% Allevyn
Hydrocellular group.
One hundred and nine patients were eligible for the PP analysis (Contreet Foam: 52,
Allevyn Hydrocellular: 57). Twelve patients
(Contreet Foam: 7, Allevyn Hydrocellular: 5)
were withdrawn due to violation of the inclusion criteria discovered in the monitoring process including some ulcers that did not meet
the defined size limits. Four patients were
excluded due to use of antibiotics unrelated
to the study ulcer (Contreet Foam: 3, Allevyn
Hydrocellular: 1). Two patients in the Contreet
Foam group were excluded due to the use of
antibiotics for study ulcer infections. Finally,
one patient in each group was excluded due
to other protocol violations.
The occurrence and cause of adverse events
were equally distributed between the study
groups. Three device-related adverse events
were recorded in the Allevyn Hydrocellular
group and four in the Contreet Foam group.
They were all skin reactions: maceration,
eczema and satellite ulcers in the Allevyn
Hydrocellular group and satellite ulcers and
deterioration of periulcer skin in the Contreet
Foam group.
Wound area reduction and healing
Five ulcers healed in each treatment group. In
the Contreet Foam group, three ulcers closed
after 2 weeks and two after 3 weeks of treatment. In the Allevyn Hydrocellular group,
two ulcers closed after 3 weeks and 3 ulcers
after four weeks of treatment.
After 4 weeks of treatment, the median relative reduction in ulcer area was significantly
higher in the Contreet Foam group than in the
Allevyn Hydrocellular group (P= 0034, Wilcoxon two-sample test). The relative reduction
was calculated as the median of each patient’s
reduction. The Contreet Foam group exhibited a
median relative reduction of 45% compared
with the median relative reduction in the
Allevyn Hydrocellular group of 25% (Figure 1;
Table 2). In the Contreet Foam group, nine of 65
(14%) ulcers did not respond to the treatment
and increased in size, compared with 16 of 64
(25%) in the Allevyn Hydrocellular group.
Odour
Odour was present in 52% (27/52) of the
study ulcers in the Contreet Foam group and
Silver-releasing foam dressing
 Blackwell Publishing Ltd and Medicalhelplines.com Inc 2005 . International Wound Journal . Vol 2 No 1 67
Key Points
. the two treatment groups were
comparable for all inclusion
characteristics
. all patients had wounds with
clinical signs of delayed healing
. approximately two-thirds of
each population had previous
wound infections
. five ulcers healed in each treatment group
. after 4 weeks of treatment, the
median relative reduction in
ulcer area was significantly higher in the Contreet Foam group
. both treatment groups had similar wound odour levels at baseline.
in 58% (33/57) of the ulcers in the Allevyn
Hydrocellular group at the start of the study.
After 1 week of treatment, there was a significantly lower presence of odour from the study
ulcers in the Contreet Foam group, 17% compared with 47% in the Allevyn Hydrocellular
group (P = 00013, Wilcoxon two-sample test)
(Figure 2A,B). This difference in odour was
maintained, as 19% of the wounds in the
Contreet Foam group and 39% in the Allevyn
Hydrocellular group still presented some
degree of odour by the end of treatment
(P = 00301, Wilcoxon two-sample test), and
there were no cases of severe odour in the
Contreet Foam group while this was still a
feature of four wounds in the Allevyn Hydrocellular group. As the presence of odour is a
potentially embarrassing and socially isolating factor for the patients, the ‘time to no
odour’ was investigated using a Kaplan—
Meier survival analysis. In this analysis, the
patients randomised to the Contreet Foam
group reached a point of ‘no odour’ from
their wounds significantly faster than the
patients in the Allevyn Hydrocellular group
(P = 004, log rank test).
Exudate management
Figures 3A and B illustrate a loss of wound
fluid control with lateral dressing leakage of
Table 1 Demographics and baseline data
Contreet Foam Allevyn Hydrocellular
Age, median years (range) 720 (40—99) 755 (42—90)
Gender, male/female 21/44 26/38
Weight, median kg (range) 790 (38—160) 795 (46—163)
Height, median cm (range) 1685 (150—193) 1690 (147—191)
Ankle/brachial index, median (range) 10 (072—166) 10 (063—143)
Ulcer size, median cm2 (range) 61 (11—534) 67 (13—506)
Duration of ulcer, median years (range) 11 (01—320) 10 (01—100)
Exudate level, moderate/high 47/18 49/15
Reason for inclusion (n)
Increased exudation 37 43
Increased pain 31 28
Discolouration of granulation tissue 38 33
Foul odour 28 28
History of study ulcer infections 43 38
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Week
Ulcer area (%)
0 4 1 2 3
Figure 1. Median relative reduction in ulcer area during the 4-week treatment period (. = Contreet Foam, &= Allevyn
Hydrocellular).
Silver-releasing foam dressing
68  Blackwell Publishing Ltd and Medicalhelplines.com Inc 2005 . International Wound Journal . Vol 2 No 1
Key Points
. after one week of treatment
there was significantly lower
presence of odour in the
Contreet Foam group
. Contreet Foam group reached
the point of being odourless
significantly faster than the
hydrocellular group
wound exudate. At the first weekly control
visits, the study personnel registered leakage
in 27% (14/52) of the dressing changes in the
Contreet Foam group compared with 44%
(25/57) in the Allevyn Hydrocellular group
(P = 006, Wilcoxon two-sample test). At the
final visits, there were significantly fewer
dressing changes associated with leakage
in the Contreet Foam group, 19% (10/52)
compared with 49% (28/57) in the Allevyn
Hydrocellular group (P = 0002, Wilcoxon twosample test). Moreover, when the absorptive
capacity of the dressings was evaluated by
the study personnel, there was a significantly
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
A
B
No odour Little odour Moderate odour Severe odour
No odour Little odour Moderate odour Severe odour
w0 w1 w2 w3 w4
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
w0 w1 w2 w3 w4
Figure 2. Level of odour from the wounds treated with Contreet Foam (A) and Allevyn Hydrocellular (B) as evaluated by the study
personnel at the weekly visits just after dressing removal. Odour was evaluated on a four-point scale ranging from ‘no odour’ to
‘severe odour’.
Table 2 Ulcer area values
Contreet
Foam
Allevyn
Hydrocellular
Values in cm2
Medianincl (range) 59 (19—374) 68 (21-338)
Meanincl (SD) 95 (85) 87 (59)
Medianterm (range) 30 (00-359) 45 (00-336)
Meanterm (SD) 61 (79) 64 (60)
Relative values (%)
Medianincl (range) 100 (100-100) 100 (100-100)
Meanincl (SD) 100 (0) 100 (0)
Medianterm (range) 548 (100-126) 746 (100-148)
Meanterm (SD) 553 (346) 710 (389)
Silver-releasing foam dressing
 Blackwell Publishing Ltd and Medicalhelplines.com Inc 2005 . International Wound Journal . Vol 2 No 1 69
Key Points
. at the final visits there were
significantly fewer dressing
changes associated with leakage in the Contreet Foam
group
better rating of Contreet Foam both after 1
week of treatment and at end of treatment
(P < 005 and P = 004, respectively, Wilcoxon
two-sample test).
Table 3 illustrates the wear times of the
dressings throughout the study period. The
study personnel were also asked to estimate
the possible additional wear time of the two
dressings based on leakage frequency and
saturation of the dressing. The overall estimated wear time for the silver-containing
dressing was significantly higher than for the
foam dressing without added silver (P = 0023,
Wilcoxon two-sample test).
Leakage is a sign of failure of the dressing to
contain the wound exudate, and the excess
fluid under and lateral to the dressing is a
cause for maceration of the skin surrounding
the wound, especially in highly exuding
wounds. The study documented a significant
difference in maceration after 1 week of treatment, as 34% of the Contreet Foam-treated
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
A
B
No leakage Little leakage
Moderate leakage Severe leakage
w1 w2 w3 w4
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
No leakage Little leakage
Moderate leakage Severe leakage
w1 w2 w3 w4
Figure 3. Extent of leakage from the two dressings, Contreet Foam (A), and Allevyn Hydrocellular (B) evaluated from week 1 to
week 4. The study personnel evaluated leakage on a four-point scale ranging from ‘no leakage’ to ‘severe leakage’.
Silver-releasing foam dressing
70  Blackwell Publishing Ltd and Medicalhelplines.com Inc 2005 . International Wound Journal . Vol 2 No 1
Key Points
. the overall estimated wear time
for the silver containing dressing
was significiantly higher than for
the hydrocellular foam
. study showed a significant difference between the Contreet
Foam (34%) and the hydrocellular foam (55%) with respect to
maceration
patients developed maceration in the periulcer skin compared with 55% in the Allevyn
Hydrocellular group (P = 0008, Wilcoxon twosample test). At the end of treatment, 37% of
the Contreet Foam-treated patients and 48% of
the Allevyn Hydrocellular-treated patients
still had some degree of periulcer skin
maceration.
Quality of life and dressing performance
From the patients’ perspective, malodorous
ulcers can be a source of embarrassment and
social isolation (1). In this study, the patients
evaluated their own odour and reported
whether they were bothered by the wound
odour. At the beginning of the study, 17% of
the patients in both groups reported that they
were bothered by the odour from their ulcer.
After 1 week of treatment, only 6% (3/52) in
the Contreet Foam group were bothered by
wound odour, whereas the percentage of
patients with troublesome odour had
increased to 21 in the Allevyn Hydrocellular
group (12/57) (P = 002, Chi-square). In both
groups, the patients reported that their general well-being was affected by the odour. On
a four-point rating scale ranging from ‘very
poor’ to ‘very good’, all patients rated the
dressings as either ‘very good’ or ‘good’ for
comfort between dressing changes.
Pain can also be of great inconvenience to
the patient. In response to the question: ‘What
was the average intensity of your pain during
the last three days?’ on a numeric box scale
ranging from 0 to 10 (0 = no pain and
10 = unbearable pain), patients from both
groups indicated a decrease in pain during
the treatment period.
The results of the EQ-5D questionnaire are
summarised in Table 4. Both groups demonstrated a slight improvement in their questionnaire score at the end of the study
period, indicating an enhanced quality of
life. There were no significant differences
between groups.
DISCUSSION
The present study, which was a randomised,
controlled, clinical trial involving 129 patients,
was designed to investigate the added effect
of ionised silver in healing of chronic wounds
with an increased bacterial load. The results
showed that critically colonised, chronic leg
ulcers healed significantly better (e.g. faster
wound area reduction) when treated with
the silver-releasing, absorbent dressing,
Contreet Foam, compared with an absorbent
foam dressing without added silver, Allevyn
Hydrocellular. Thus, the present study
demonstrates the added benefit of silver in
the treatment of chronic venous leg ulcers
with signs of delayed healing.
The ulcers were specifically selected to exhibit clinical signs of critical colonisation with
bacteria by the presence of one or more of
increased exudate, increased pain, discoloured granulation tissue or foul odour and
delayed healing (9,12,17—20).The study population was comparable to other studies of
chronic venous leg ulcers, and no differences
between the two study groups were observed
with regard to age, gender and ulcer characteristics (4,5,21).
In the present study, the weekly median
wound reduction rate was 113% (mean = 112%)
for the Contreet Foam group. This healing rate
was higher than healing rates reported in other
Table 3 Wear time
Contreet Foam Allevyn Hydrocellular
Wear time, mean/median (days) 33/28 31/28
Additional wear time, mean/median (days) 18/10 08/00
Total estimated wear time, mean/median (days) 51/38 39/28
Table 4 Results from the EQ-5D questionnaire (1 = perfect
health, 0 = death)
Median (n)
Week 0 Week 4
Contreet Foam 069 079
Allevyn Hydrocellular 071 079
Silver-releasing foam dressing
 Blackwell Publishing Ltd and Medicalhelplines.com Inc 2005 . International Wound Journal . Vol 2 No 1 71
Key Points
. both pain and wound odour are
quality of life issues in patients
with chronic wounds
. both groups demonstrated a
slight improvement in their QoL
score indicating enhanced quality of life
. the study population was comparable to other studies of
chronic venous ulcers
studies on aseptic treatment of similar
wounds. Hansson (21) reported a weekly
mean healing rate of 89% of Cadexomer
iodine paste in a 153-patient randomised controlled trial, and Vanscheidt et al. (11) found
weekly reduction rates of 60% in a study of
the effect of a silver-containing dressing,
Aquacel Ag, in chronic leg ulcers of mixed
aetiology in 18 patients.
The results from the present study offer
confirmation of results obtained in a previous,
smaller, non comparative study by Karlsmark
et al. (4) on safety and clinical performance of
Contreet Foam. Results on ulcer reduction,
wear time, leakage and odour reduction from
this study were comparable to the present
findings.
Despite the overall wound area reduction,
some ulcers increased in size during the
4-week treatment period (Contreet Foam:
14% and Allevyn Hydrocellular: 25%). It is
likely that the difference between the groups
may be due to the effect of silver penetrating
the upper layers of the wound, but part of the
non responsiveness may be due to the presence of bacteria in the deeper layers of the
wound where only systemically administered
antibiotics would help clearing the bacteria
(17,22).
Interestingly, although the presence of
malodorous ulcers affects the quality of life of
the patients, this feature is only rarely investigated. Approximately 50% of the included
wounds were malodorous, which is a common
feature of critical colonisation. The results
obtained by Karlsmark et al. (4) were confirmed
by the present study demonstrating a rapid
and effective reduction in odour of wounds
treated with the silver-containing dressing.
This significant difference in favour of the silver-containing dressing was maintained
throughout the treatment period and was supported by the patients’ self-reports. The present
study indicates that the presence and severity
of odour may be the most sensitive parameter
for evaluation of the effect of treatment on
bacteria in wounds.
The silver-containing dressing significantly
lowered the incidence of lateral wound fluid
leakage and periulcer skin maceration compared with the non silver-containing comparator. The study personnel furthermore
assessed the absorption capacity of Contreet
Foam as higher than that of the comparator.
Decrease in exudate and thereby leakage frequency and maceration can be regarded as
natural consequences and a positive outcome
of the faster healing process.
Evaluation of additional wear time suggested that Contreet Foam could have been
left in place for one additional day. Despite
the extra cost of silver-containing dressings,
the longer wear time and faster healing may
therefore have significant beneficial cost consequences in practice.
No difference was detected between groups
in quality of life score using the EQ-5D. The
EQ-5D is a generic, multidimensional tool,
designed to have a broad coverage and may
therefore not be sufficiently sensitive to identify ulcer-related changes in quality of life.
CONCLUSION
The present study provides evidence on the
superior performance of the sustained silverreleasing dressing, Contreet Foam, compared
with a traditional absorbent moist wound
healing dressing in the treatment of chronic
venous and mixed venous/arterial leg ulcers
with delayed healing when compared with
normal expectations for the patient. The
silver-releasing dressing reduced the wound
area significantly faster than the traditional
dressing, thereby restarting the healing process. Another advantage of the silver-releasing, absorbent dressing was a significant
decrease in odour, already within the first
week of application. Additionally, the clinical
effect was accompanied by reduced leakage
and maceration, suggesting good exudate
management capabilities of the silver-releasing dressing. The results of this randomised,
controlled study suggest an important role of
sustained silver-releasing dressings in the
treatment of critically colonised chronic
wounds.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank the following Clinical Trial Monitors
for valuable help: Mr A. Aabenhus, Mrs N.N.
Florboe, Mrs S. Cranton, Mrs C. Garvin,
Mr J.H. Koenen and Miss H. Bodewald. The
study was financially supported by Coloplast
A/S, Humlebaek, Denmark.
REFERENCES
1 Jones JE. The use of holistic assessment in the treatment of leg ulcers. Br J Nurs 2000;9(16):1040—52.
Silver-releasing foam dressing
72  Blackwell Publishing Ltd and Medicalhelplines.com Inc 2005 . International Wound Journal . Vol 2 No 1
Key Points
. study provides evidence on
superior performance of a sustained release silver dressing in
the healing of chronic venous
ulcers
. specifically the dressing reduced
wound area significantly, provided a significant decrease in
odour and provided good exudate management, reducing
leakage and maceration
2 Phillips T, Stanton B, Provan A, Lew R. A study of
the impact of leg ulcers on quality of life: financial, social and psychologic implications. J Am
Acad Dermatol 1994;31(1):49—53.
3 Callam MJ, Harper DR, Dale JJ, Ruckley CV.
Chronic ulcer of the leg: clinical history. Br Med
J 1987;294:1389—91.
4 Karlsmark T, Agerslev RH, Bendz SH, Larsen JR,
Roed-Petersen J, Andersen KE. Clinical performance of a new silver dressing, Contreet Foam, for
chronic exuding venous leg ulcers. J Wound Care
2003;12(9):351—4.
5 Andersen KE, Franken CPM, Gad P, Larsen AM,
Larsen JR, van Neer P, Vuerstaeck J, Wuite J,
Neumann H. A randomized, controlled study to
compare the effectiveness of two foam dressings
in the management of lower leg ulcers. Ostomy
Wound Manage 2002;48(8):34—41.
6 Jemec GBE, Karlsmark T, Brink-Kjær T, Wulf HC.
Prediction of healing in patients with venous leg
ulcers. Acta Derm Venereol APA 1999;8:19—23.
7 Sibbald RG, Williamson D, Orsted HL, Campbell K,
Keast D, Krasner D, Sibbald D. Preparing the
wound bed — debridement, bacterial balance,
and moisture balance. Ostomy Wound Manage
2000;46(11):14—35.
8 Kingsley A, Ovington L. The impact of microorganisms and therapeutic agents in the infected
wound bed. Wound, Ostomy and Continence
Nurses Society, Educational Breakfast Symposium, June 14—18, 2003, 1—18.
9 Enoch S, Harding K. Wound bed preparation: the
science behind the removal of barriers to healing.
Wounds 2003;15(7):213—29.
10 Kingsley A. The wound infection continuum and its
application to clinical practice. Ostomy Wound
Manage 2003;49(7A Suppl):1—7.
11 Vanscheidt W, Lazareth I, Routkovsky-Norval C.
Safety evaluation of a new ionic silver dressing
in the management of chronic ulcers. Wounds
2003;15(11):371—8.
12 Wunderlich U, Orfanos CE. Behandlung der ulcera
cruris venosa mit trockenen wundauflagen, phasenu¨bergreifende anwendung eines silberimpra¨gnierten Aktivkohle-xerodressings. Der Hautartz
1991;42:446—50.
13 Cutting KF, Harding KG. Criteria for identifying
wound infection. J Wound Care 1994;3(4):198—201.
14 Larsen K. In vitro evaluation of a new antibacterial
foam dressing. Presented at the 12th Conference
of the European Wound Management Association, 2002, Granada, Spain.
15 The EuroQol Group. EuroQol — a new facility for the
measurement of health-related quality of life.
Health Policy 1990;16(3):199—208.
16 Brooks R. EuroQol: the current state of play. Health
Policy 1996;37(1):53—72.
17 Falanga V, Harding K. The clinical relevance of wound
bed preparation. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2002:1—67.
18 Bowler P. Progressing toward healing: wound infection and the role of an advanced silver-containing
hydrofiber dressing. Ostomy Wound Manage
2003;49(8a):2—5.
19 Lee SK. Clinical experiences with technologies: case
reports on the use of two hydrofiber dressings.
Ostomy Wound Manage 2003;49(8a):6—9.
20 White RJ, Cooper R, Kingsley A. Wound colonization and infection: the role of topical antimicrobials. Br J Nursing 2001;10(9):563—78.
21 Hansson C. The effects of cadexomer iodine paste in
the treatment of venous leg ulcers compared with
hydrocolloid dressing and paraffin gauze dressing. Int J Dermatol 1998;37:390—6.
22 Schultz GS, Sibbald RG, Falanga V, Ayello EA,
Dowsett C, Harding K, Romanelli M, Stacey MC,
Teot L, Vanscheidt W. Wound bed preparation:
a systematic approach to wound management.
Wound Repair Regen 2003;11(2 Suppl):S1—S28.
Silver-releasing foam dressing
 Blackwell Publishing Ltd and Medicalhelplines.com Inc 2005 . International Wound Journal . Vol 2 No 1 73