7683
Saturday 28 November 1970
DOUBLE-BLIND TRIAL OF EARLY
DEMETHYLCHLORTETRACYCLINE IN
MINOR RESPIRATORY ILLNESS IN
GENERAL PRACTICE
J. G. R. HOWIE* G. A. CLARK
General Practice, Glasgow W.1
Summary
829 healthy male volunteers aged 20-49
were issued with supplies of either demethylchlortetracycline or placebo in late October,
1969, with instructions to take a course of treatment in
the event of getting a cold or influenza-like illness
between November, 1969, and April, 1970. Clinical
and other information was self-recorded on reply-paid
postcards, one card for each month. 91% of cards
were returned, and 836 courses of treatment were
taken by 543 of the patients. Morbidity was assessed
in terms of the number of days in each illness on which
purulent spit was noted and the number of days off
work. Closely similar patterns of morbidity were found
for patients taking antibiotic and placebo; whether
treatment was started early in the illness, before or
after onset of cough, purulent nasal discharge or
purulent spit had no effect. Being a non-smoker rather
than a 20-plus cigarettes a day smoker was of greater
benefit than taking the antibiotic rather than the
placebo. Work loss averaged 1&middot;1 days per illness in
patients on antibiotic and 1&middot;5 days per illness in those
on placebo. Medical advice was sought in 109 illnesses in which the trial tablets had been used. The
need for insurance certificates seemed to be a more
prominent reason for attendance than did morbidity
referable to absence of antibiotic treatment. Sideeffects were recorded in 6&middot;7% of illnesses on antibiotic
treatment and 1&middot;8% of illnesses on placebo treatment.
No justification has thus been found to support the
early use of a tetracycline for minor respiratory illness in otherwise healthy patients.
Introduction
THE general practitioner’s principal clinical dilemma
when faced with epidemics of winter respiratory illness
-of which influenza is the most commonly publicised
but by no means only facet-is whether to become
what Apthorp 1 neatly described as an early or late
tetracycline prescriber. The late H. S. Banks was for
years a most active supporter of the early prescribing of antibiotics for minor respiratory illness,
advising their use within hours of the onset of symptoms and at least before onset of evidence of secondarily
*Present address: Department of General Practice, University of
Aberdeen.
infected nasal discharge. 2,3 Both early and late users
of tetracycline believe sincerely that their own approach
benefits their patients physically by reducing the net
morbidity from reduced risk of bronchitis and increased side-effects of treatment, and the country
economically in terms of reduced work-loss against the
cost of antibiotic treatment. The Lancet 4 concluded
that " Until controlled trials in matched populations of
sufficient size have demonstrated a clear advantage of
antibiotic therapy over placebo under double-blind
conditions, the early common cold should have no
more than symptomatic treatment ". We believe that
this conclusion applies to influenza as well as to the
common cold, and describe below a trial designed to
provide some of the evidence lacking on these points.
Patients and Methods
In May, 1969, all 2133 male patients between 20 and 49
years of age in two 3-man predominantly middle-class
Glasgow practices were asked to indicate if they were
willing to take part in a trial of "
two different approaches to the treatment of colds and ’flu-like illnesses " over the
winter of 1969-70. Some 20% of the patients were
untraced at their registered address, but 857 patients
indicated a wish to join the trial.
In October, 1969, all 857 received by post a supply of a
tetracycline or matching placebo tablets, identified only
by code number, with instructions to use a course in the
event of contracting a cold or influenza-like illness which
at the end of its second day was not obviously recovering
spontaneously. Also enclosed were six reply-paid postcards for recording for each day of the 6 months of the
trial (November, 1969, to April, 1970) the presence of
cough, spit, purulent spit, purulent nasal discharge,
attendance at the doctor, work loss both with and without
an insurance certificate, and whether trial tablets were taken.
The cards included a request to indicate other medication
taken and any side-effects of treatment. A " record card ",
also reply-paid, was enclosed for immediate return indicating occupation, smoking habits, family size, house-type,
work loss due to respiratory illness the previous year, and
age. This card was identified, as were the monthly morbidity cards, by a code number.
Allocation to active or placebo group was on a random
basis.
Further supplies of tablets were issued where necessary.
Patients once given the active drug were always given the
active drug and vice versa.
829 of the 857 recipients of the material for the trial
returned their record card, and this group of 829 patients was regarded as the trial population.
The active drug was demethylchlortetracycline (’Ledermycin’) and each course was one tablet (300 mg.) twice
daily for 5 days, this being regarded by the manufacturers
as the therapeutic requirement. The placebo contained
lactose and was not recognisable as such to the medically
qualified participants in the trial.
1100
Patients whose monthly reply card had not been received
by the middle of the next month received a reminder which
was repeated if necessary a month later. After three
reminders no further action was taken.
Patients participating in the trial and requiring additional antibiotics were usually treated with ampicillin.
Accordingly patients with possible history of drug allergy were asked to discuss the matter with one of the organisers
of the trial and patients at risk were excluded.
Each illness was defined in terms of days with cough,
spit, purulent spit, purulent nasal discharge, and of work
loss, and note made of the interval between the commencement of treatment and the start of the various symptoms
and signs of illness listed above. This was completed
before the treatment code was broken.
66 patients with chronic cough or spit were excluded
from the main analysis. It had been intended to exclude
all such patients from the trial by our own screening of
participants and by a request in the letter accompanying
the trial tablets for patients with chest trouble to discuss
their participation in the trial with one of the organising
doctors.
Forty illnesses which would apparently have qualified
for a course of trial tablets, but in which the patient consulted his doctor instead and received treatment other than
the trial tablets, were analysed separately.
Material was punched on 80-column cards and analysed
using conventional techniques.
Results
The 829 participants in the trial returned 4582
cards out of 4974 possible, giving a response-rate of
92%. 293 patients took 448 courses of the active
drug (1-52 courses per patient) and 250 patients took
388 courses of the placebo (1 -55 courses per patient).
198 patients took no courses of active or placebo drug.
The 66 patients excluded from the main analysis due to
chronic respiratory signs or symptoms took 45 courses
of the active drug and 46 of the placebo. The 40
illnesses apparently qualifying for trial treatment but
managed otherwise by the doctor were divided 13/27
TABLE I-INFLUENCE OF ACTIVE AND PLACEBO TABLETS ON PRODUCTION OF PURULENT SPIT IN RELATION TO AGE, SMOKING
HABITS, AND MONTH OF ILLNESS
Comparisons between each active and placebo entry in columns 3 and
4showsX’<3’8; P>0’05.
TABLE II-INFLUENCE OF ACTIVE AND PLACEBO TABLETS ON PRODUCTION OF PURULENT SPIT IN RELATION TO TIME DURING
ILLNESS AT WHICH TREATMENT WAS STARTED
Comparison between each active and placebo entry in columns 3 and 4
shows x < 3-8; p > 0-05.
between active and placebo patients. 22 patients
returned no cards.
Morbidity
Morbidity was measured in terms of cough, spit,
purulent spit, and purulent nasal discharge. Table I
shows the average number of days of purulent spit
recorded for patients receiving active drug and placebo,
together with the percentages of episodes noted free of
purulent spit and noted to have had ten or more days
of purulent spit. The figures for the two groups are
very similar. Subdivision of the whole series by age
shows that the placebo group contained more than its
share of patients aged over forty, but the variations in
morbidity between the age-groups are no more noticeable than those between active and placebo treatments
for each age-group. Similarly there seems to be less
benefit in being an antibiotic-taker than in being a nonsmoker as against a " twenty-plus " smoker. The final
subdivision of table I by the month of the illness
shows the variations between the months in each series
to be as great as those between active and placebo
treatment for each individual month. In the 36
comparisons which can be made in table i between
active and placebo treatment, the advantage is to
active treatment in 18, the same in 4, and to placebo
treatment in 14. Z2 2 tests were applied to the figures for
illnesses with no purulent spit and with purulent spit
of 10 days or more. No significant differences between
corresponding active and placebo results were found.
Similar patterns for each variable were noted for
cough, spit, and purulent nasal discharge. t
Work-loss
The 448 illnesses treated with antibiotics and the 388
on the placebo drug had an average work-loss of 1 ’1 and
t Details may be obtained from J. G. R. H.
1101
1.5 days per illness, respectively. There was work-loss
in 98 of 448 illnesses (22%) on active treatment, and
certificates were issued in 42 cases (9%). The comparable figures on placebo treatment were 96 of 388
illnesses with work-loss (25%), 48 being accompanied
by a certificate (12%).
Work-loss totalling 10 days or more was noted in
13 illnesses on active treatment and 18 illnesses on
placebo treatment (2-9% and 5-3%, respectively). This
difference is not significant. In general those categories in table I showing higher medical morbidity
(e.g., December illnesses) carried a higher risk of
work-loss.
Social-security benefits would have been payable on
253 days for the 448 illnesses on active treatment and
on 298 days for the 338 illnesses on placebo treatment.
This represents an average of 0-6 days per illness on
active treatment and 0-8 days per illness on placebo
treatment. The cost to the nation of this small difference would closely approximate to the cost of a
course of antibiotics.
Influence of Time of Starting Treatment
The results for patients on active and placebo treatment were subdivided according to whether the
treatment had been started before, at the same time as,
or after the onset of symptoms or signs (table n).
Comparisons in table 11 favour active treatment in 22
comparisons, neither treatment in 2, and favour the
placebo in 18 comparisons.
Illnesses Requiring Medical Advice
In 51 of 448 illnesses on treatment with demethylchlortetracycline and 58 of 388 illnesses on treatment
TABLE III-ANALYSIS OF ILLNESSES REQUIRING MEDICAL ATTENTION
with placebo the doctor’s advice was required. Table
III siiows an analysis of these illnesses, together with
the 40 illnesses for which medical advice was sought
without previous use of trial tablets. In 137 out of 149
consultations a sickness certificate was issued or antibiotics prescribed or both. The series are too small to
allow realistic subdivision of the groups into antibiotic
and non-antibiotic receivers, and as the precise point of
the illness at which the doctor prescribed the antibiotics was not recorded in all cases the results would
in any case be meaningless.
Illnesses in " Chronic " Patients
Of the 91 illnesses in patients with chronic cough or
spit 11 required the doctor’s advice and in 6 illnesses
antibiotics were prescribed (2 of 45 on active treatment, 4 of 46 on placebo treatment). This group of
patients included 46 patients who smoked over twenty
cigarettes daily and only 28 non-smokers, the reverse
proportions to those in the main series. The age
distribution and time of year of the illnesses was similar
to that of the main study, as was the pattern of workloss.
Side-effects
Side-effects were described by 7 of 250 patients on
placebo treatment and 25 of 293 on active treatment,
this representing 2-9% and 9-5%, respectively. In
terms of courses of treatment taken, the figures were
7 of 388 and 30 of 448, giving percentages for placebo
and active treatment of 1-8 and 6-7, respectively.
Most of the side-effects were gastrointestinal: 1 patient
in the active group developed a drug eruption which
could have been related to a proprietary treatment he
had bought himself. 5 patients on active treatment had
side-effects more than once.
Discussion
The principal results tabulated give neither medical
nor economic justification for the early use of tetracycline in colds or influenza-like illnesses in normally
healthy adult males between 20 and 50 years of age.
The presence of a sharp difference in incidence of
side-effects between active and placebo drugs, though
short of statistical significance, suggests that the tablets
were taken as directed and that the recording of results
was as satisfactory as could be expected.
The epidemic of influenza seemed to start clinically
in mid-November, reaching a peak at Christmas and
stopping abruptly after New Year. The general conclusions seem to apply both at the point where influenza
would have formed a major element in the study and
also later when the non-influenzal illnesses would
have predominated.
Only 13% of the illnesses (109 of 836) involved the
general practitioner, and it is difficult to assess what
this figure would have been in the absence of the trial
treatment available. The results show the frequency
with which an antibiotic was prescribed in illness in
which the doctor was involved (60% where no trial
tablets were used and 31 % where trial tablets had been
taken). Superficial assessment of the patients attending
the doctor and receiving an antibiotic shows no obvious
benefit over those treated without an antibiotic, but we
have not got enough data to permit conclusions to be
drawn. The failure of tetracycline, started after the
development of purulent spit, to modify the untreated
disease (table 11) makes us question the justification
for the use of tetracycline even in the presence of
purulent spit (a situation widely regarded as an indication for such treatment).
We hope to examine the prescribing of antibiotics
for patients requesting medical advice for minor respiratory illness in greater clinical depth during the
winter of 1971-72. At present, however, there seems
no place for the encouragement of early tetracycline treatment of otherwise healthy adults with colds or
influenza-like illness.
We thank Lederle Laboratories Ltd. and Dr. L. S. Bernstein
for generous support of this project and for providing demethyl-
1102
chlortetracycline and placebo tablets for use in the trial; Mrs.
Jean Donald for secretarial help; and our partners and patients
for their patience and cooperation. Dr. G. Hems supplied
statistical advice and Mrs. Shena Pyper prepared the manuscript.
Requests for reprints should be addressed to J. G. R. H.,
Department of General Practice, University Medical Buildings,
Foresterhill, Aberdeen AB9 2ZD.
REFERENCES
1. Apthorp, B. D. Br. med. J. 1969, i, 49.
2. Banks, H. S. Lancet, 1968, i, 425.
3. Banks, H. S., Ritchie, J. M. Jl R. Coll. gen. Practit. 1969, 18, 166.
4. Lancet, 1968, i, 240.
BROWN URINE AS A CLUE TO
PHENACETIN INTOXICATION
A. L. MILLER L. R. WORSLEY
P. K. CHU
Courtauld Institute of Biochemistry,
Middlesex Hospital Medical School, London W1P 5PR
Summary
Dark-brown urine, with the unusual
property of reducing silver-nitrate solutions in the cold, may be a useful clue leading to the
recognition of unsuspected phenacetin intoxication or
abuse. Confirmation may be obtained by the detection
of phenacetin metabolites in the urine by simple
one-way chromatography after acid hydrolysis.
Introduction
THE admission to this hospital of a number of
patients with syndromes which we believe to be
wholly or partly attributable to the ingestion of phenacetin, and with abnormally dark urine, has drawn
our attention to the value of this simple observation as
a diagnostic clue. We describe here the clinical features
of five cases and a simple chromatographic technique
for the detection of phenacetin metabolites in the
urine.
Case-reports
Case 1
A male, aged 42, who had previously been in hospital
with a thrombocytopenia of unknown aetiology, was admitted semicomatose, disorientated, and giving a bizarre and
inconsistent history. He had profound methasmoglobmsemia. His urine was dark brown, and reduced ammoniacal
silver-nitrate solution at room temperature. He subsequently developed severe hasmolytic anaemia, and jaundice
with evidence of hepatocellular damage. He slowly recovered physically but was discharged to psychiatric care.
No history of ingestion of drugs or other chemicals was ever
obtained, but we were led to postulate poisoning by selfadministered photographic developer because of the striking
similarity between this patient and reported cases. 1,2 No
satisfactory evidence for this was ever obtained. Phenacetin
metabolites were subsequently detected in the urine (see
below).
Case 2
A month after discharge of the first patient, a 22-year-old woman was admitted after an overdose of compound
codeine tablets (aspirin, phenacetin, and codeine phosphate).
Her plasma-salicylate was 85 mg. per 100 ml. on admission.
Her urine was dark brown and reduced silver-nitrate solution in the cold. She had severe methxmoglobinxmia, and
severe haemolytic ansemia and hepatocellular jaundice developed. She recovered slowly. The similarity between
these two patients suggested poisoning by a common agent.
Methoemoglobinmmia and liver damage are well recognised
features of phenacetin poisoning, and phenacetin is a
constituent of many compound analgesics. However, reports of phenacetin poisoning make no mention of dark
urine, or of the reducing properties of the urine in this
condition; we have come to regard these as quite typical.
Case 3
A woman, aged 46, was admitted with a week-long
history of abdominal pain, eventually attributed to a
urinary infection. Investigation showed a haemoglobin level
of 10-4 g. per 100 ml., with a reticulocytosis and numerous
Heinz bodies. A sample of urine sent to the laboratory was
noted to be dark, to reduce silver-nitrate solution, and to
contain phenacetin metabolites. On further questioning the
patient was found to have been taking compound codeine
tablets, some prescribed by her doctor and others purchased
(as ’ Veganin ’) from a chemist, in considerable numbers, not less than 75 in the week preceding her admission. The
cause of her hxmolytic anxmia was then apparent.
Case 4
A male narcotic addict, aged 25, took "
numerous "
aspirin/phenacetin/codeine tablets in wine before noon and
was admitted for observation in the early hours of the
following morning. He was not gravely ill and was discharged next day. The urine was not dark, but phenacetin
metabolites and salicylates were readily detected. (This
patient is recorded because the chromatographic findings are illustrated.)
Case 5
A woman, aged 48, had malabsorption with troublesome
diarrhoea after a resection of strangulated bowel. Codeine
was prescribed to control the diarrhoea. A 24-hour urine
sample was collected after one of her visits to the outpatient
department, and sent for urinary calcium assay. This urine
sample was noted to be dark and to contain large amounts
of phenacetin metabolites and also salicylate. When
questioned at her next outpatient attendance a month later,
the patient agreed that she had been taking " up to twelve "
paracetamol tablets a day on occasion, but denied taking
aspirin and phenacetin-containing analgesics. Whilst the
ingestion of paracetamol explains the appearance of paminophenol on chromatograms (see below) the presence of
other metabolites together with salicylates suggests rather
the unrecalled ingestion of phenacetin-containing analgesics.
At all events the observation of the dark urine drew attention to the ingestion of analgesics on an unsuspected scale.
Laboratory Investigations
Four of the five patients had dark urine, the colour
varying through shades of brown to black and deepening on standing. This colour could not be attributed
to blood pigments since it occurred when there was no
spectroscopic evidence of haemoglobin or its derivatives
(though three of the five patients had hsematuria at
some stage of their illness).
In all cases the urine reduced ammoniacal silvernitrate solution at room temperatures, giving a precipitate of metallic silver.
Chromatography
We devised a rapid method for the detection of
phenacetin metabolites. Urine samples were hydrolysed by heating 10 ml. of urine with 3 ml. of concentrated hydrochloric acid in a boiling-water bath for