Original Research Articles
Albuterol Delivered by Metered-Dose Inhaler to Treat
Acute Bronchitis
William J. H ueston, M D
lau Claire, Wisconsin
Background. Previous research has suggested that
cough associated with acute bronchitis is more likely to
subside within 7 days when treated with albuterol than
with an antibiotic. This study examines the effectiveness
of aerosolized albuterol for the treatment of acute bronchitis in patients treated with erythromycin or placebo.
Methods. A double-blind, randomized placebo-controlled
trial of albuterol delivered by metered-dose inhaler (MDI)
was conducted in a primary care setting with healthy adult
patients who presented with a productive cough of fewer
than 30 days’ duration. In addition to randomization for
albuterol, patients were also randomized to receive erythromycin or placebo. Outcomes were assessed at follow-up
after 7 days.
Results. Patients treated with albuterol MDI were less
likely to be coughing after 7 days of treatment than
were patients using a placebo inhaler (61% still coughing vs 91%, P—.02). When analysis was stratified by cig
arette smoking status and the use of erythromycin, the
differences observed between albuterol MDI patients
and controls persisted.
Conclusions. Albuterol appears to reduce the likelihood
that patients with acute bronchitis will be coughing after 7 days following initiation of treatment. This effect
appears to be independent of cigarette smoking or the
concomitant use of antibiotics.
Key words. Cough; bronchitis; acute disease; albuterol;
family practice. ( / Fam Pract 1994; 39:437-440)
Acute bronchitis is one of the most common problems
encountered by primary care physicians.1 3 This disorder
is usually a self-limited illness that resolves spontaneously
without therapy. Although antibiotic therapy is frequently used for patients with acute bronchitis,4'5 there is
only scant evidence that patients receive significant clinical
benefit from any of the antibiotics previously evaluated.6^9
Because of the similarity in pulmonary function test
results in patients with acute bronchitis and those with asthma,10'11 treatment with bronchodilating agents may be a
more effective therapy than antibiotics for acute bronchitis.
Initial studies evaluating this strategy suggested that, when
compared with patients treated with erythromycin, patients
treated with bronchodilators had more prompt resolution of
their symptoms.12,13 This study evaluates aerosolized albuSubmitted, revised, September 6, 1994.
From the D epartment o f Family Medicine, University of Wisconsin, Fan C.laire
Family Practice Residency, Fan Claire. Requests fo r reprints should be addressed to
William J. Hueston, M D , Eau Claire Family Practice Residency, 807 South Far well
St, Eau Claire, W I 54701.
© 1994 Appleton & Lange ISSN 0094-3509
The Journal of Family Practice, Vol. 39, No. 5(Nov), 1994
terol delivered by a metered-dose inhaler to further explore
the potential effectiveness of bronchodilators for the treatment of acute bronchitis symptoms.
Methods
The sample was drawn from adult patients aged 18 to 65
who attended two community-based family practice centers in Kentucky and Wisconsin. Patients who presented
with a productive cough of less than 30 days’ duration
and who had no signs of pneumonia, as determined by a
negative chest radiograph or by the clinical judgment of
their physicians, were initially eligible for inclusion. Patients who had any history of asthma, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, or cardiac disease were excluded, as
were all patients who were pregnant or allergic to either of
the study medications, and those who had received antibiotics for any reason in the previous 2 weeks. Patients
who had previously had bronchitis were not excluded.
After meeting the inclusion and exclusion criteria for
437
Aerosolized Albuterol for Acute Bronchitis Hueston
the project, patients were informed of the study protocols
and gave informed consent prior to enrollment. Patients
were then given a packet containing an inhaler and 40
opaque capsules that contained either erythromycin (250
mg) or a lactose placebo. Inhalers contained either active
albuterol (Ventolin inhaler, Allen & Hanburys, Research
Triangle Park, NC) or an inert placebo (obtained from
Allen & Hanburys). Before distribution to the study participants, the canisters containing the inhaled drug or
placebo had been removed from their plastic containers
and opaque tape had been placed around the canister to
disguise its contents. Canisters were then randomly returned to the plastic containers so that the color of the
outside container was not indicative of the medication in
the canister. Containers were then covered with a medication label that noted the study number and gave instructions for use. Written instructions on the proper use
of an inhaler were given to all patients, and an office nurse
reviewed the instructions with the patients before they left
the office. Based on the contents of the study packets, four
groups of patients were defined: albuterol and erythromycin, albuterol and placebo, erythromycin and placebo,
and two placebos.
Examining physicians completed an initial data form,
listing demographics and features of the presenting illness
for each patient. During the 7 days of therapy, patients
recorded in a diary the presence of cough or night cough,
ability to perform their normal work, and general level of
well-being. Patients also recorded any side effects and the
use of other over-the-counter (OTC) medications. After
7 days of therapy, patients returned for follow-up, their
diaries were collected, and they were reexamined. Patients
had been instructed to bring their unused capsules to the
follow-up visit so that the remaining pills could be
counted in order to estimate patient compliance. When
patients did not attend their scheduled follow-up appointment, they were contacted by telephone, reminded
of their appointment, and examined the following day.
Data analysis consisted of the chi-square test for categorical variables. When categorical variables were stratified for analysis, comparisons were performed using a
Mantel-Haenszel statistic. Continuous variables were analyzed with Student’s t test when groups had similar variances, and with the Kruskal-Wallis H test when variances
differed. Statistical significance was defined as an a <.05.
The study was originally designed to enroll 132 patients and compare the four groups noted above. Included in the design was an evaluation of outcomes after
one third and after two thirds of the patients completed
the trial. Because of statistically significant results found in
the primary study outcome (resolution of cough), the
study was suspended after 46 patients completed the
study.
Table 1. Patient Characteristics at the Time of Enrollment in a
Study of the Effectiveness of Albuterol Administered by
Metered-Dose Inhaler to Treat Acute Bronchitis
Albuterol Control Group
Variable Group (n=23) (n=23) P Value
Male, % 48 30 NS
Mean age (SD), y 32.9 (12.7) 36.9 (11.4) NS
Smokers, % 43 57 NS
Mean duration of
cough (SD), d
8.6 (6.6) 8.7 (5.2 ) NS
Night cough
present, %
83 96 NS
Fever over 39°C, % 13 21 NS
Abnormal lung 52 52 NS
examination, %
Results
Using the inclusion and exclusion criteria detailed above,
46 patients completed the study. Twenty-three patients
were assigned to albuterol metered-dose inhalers (MDI)
and 23 received placebo inhalers. All patients who were
initially enrolled completed follow-up within 8 days of
starting the study medications.
Compared with control patients, those who were
randomized to albuterol MDIs were similar in age, sex,
and cigarette use (Table 1). In addition, clinical aspects of
their disease (duration of cough, presence of a night
cough, and presence of a fever or an abnormal lung examination) were not significantly different between the
albuterol and control groups. When abnormalities were
present on lung examination, the most common finding
in both groups was wheezing (52% of patients in albuterol
group and 30% of patients in the control group).
When patients returned for follow-up after 7 days of
treatment, there was no difference between patients in the
albuterol group and patients in the control group in the
rate of compliance with therapy as defined by the number
of capsules returned after 1 week (3.4±5.3 vs 2.2±3.2,
respectively, P=NS).
After 7 days of therapy, a statistically significant decrease in the percentage of patients who were still coughing was noted for the albuterol group as compared with
the control group (61% vs 91%, P = .02). Among patients
treated with albuterol, there was no statistically significant
difference in the percentage who were cough-free based
on initial lung examination after 7 days (36% resolved in
those with normal initial examinations vs 42% resolved in
those with initial abnormalities, P=NS). Examination of
other symptoms showed no significant differences be438 The Journal of Family Practice, Vol. 39, No. 5(Nov), 1994
Aerosolized Albuterol for Acute Bronchitis Hurston
Table 2. Outcomes After 7 days of Treatment with Albuterol
Metered-Dose Inhaler vs Placebo
Outcome
Albuterol
Group (n=23)
Control Group
(n=23) P Value
Still coughing, % 61 91 .02
Productive cough
present, %
57 48 NS
Night cough
persists,* %
26 45 NS
* Analysis lim ited to patients who initially presented with night cough.
tween patients treated with albuterol and those treated
with placebo (Table 2).
Four of the 23 (17%) patients in both groups continued to have lung abnormalities after 7 days of therapy,
and 2 (9%) of the patients in both groups had side effects
attributed to the study medications. While an equal number of patients in each group experienced side effects that
they attributed to the medication, none in either group
stopped taking their medication because of side effects
(Table 2). Symptoms diaries showed no significant differences between the groups with respect to the amount of
time required for their level of well-being to improve. By
day 4, however, patients treated with albuterol were more
likely to return to work (78% vs 52%, P=.05). There was
no difference in the percentage of patients in the albuterol
and control groups who used OTC medications (30% vs
26%, P=NS). The use of OTC medications was limited to
acetaminophen or ibuprofen (four patients), cough syrups containing dextromethorphan (three patients), and
antihistamine/decongestants (six patients). None of the
patients reported using any OTC medications containing
theophylline or aerosolized epinephrine.
Because of the possibility that differences in the percentage of patients in the two groups who used erythromycin could have influenced the observed outcomes, further analysis was performed with stratification by
erythromycin use. When this was done, patients in the
albuterol group continued to show a statistically significant decrease in coughing at 7 days (Mantel-Haenszel
statistic=4.30, P=.04) and returned to work (MantelHaenszel statistic=4.27, P=.04) as compared with controls.
The outcomes were also stratified by smoking status.
This analysis was conducted on the premise that all patients who use cigarettes may have some degree of obstructive lung disease, and thus, smokers would be more
likely to improve with albuterol use. Although the number of patients in each group was small, no difference in
response rates was seen in smokers as compared with
nonsmokers (69% vs 50% still coughing) in the albuterol
group.
Discussion
These results suggest that patients with acute bronchitis
who were treated with MDI-delivered albuterol were
more likely than patients treated with the placebo inhaler
to have their cough resolve within 7 days of treatment and
to return to work early. Although the number of subjects
in each group was small, an improvement in cough was
noted in both smokers and nonsmokers treated with albuterol and either erythromycin or placebo.
This study confirms the findings of a previous study
that compared the effects of oral albuterol to those of
erythromycin in adults with acute bronchitis.11 In the
previous study, an increased percentage of patients
treated with albuterol experienced resolution of their
cough within 7 days as compared with patients treated
with erythromycin. However, 35% of patients treated
with oral albuterol reported side effects and 10% discontinued the medication for this reason.12 The results of the
current study demonstrate that MDI-delivered albuterol
is just as effective as and better tolerated than oral albuterol. This study also included a randomized group of
patients treated with antibiotics in combination with al
buterol and found that the concomitant use of these two
medications did not appear to affect the short-term outcomes of patients.
Previous evidence has suggested that the symptoms
of acute bronchitis represent transient bronchial edema
and spasm. The importance of bronchospasm in acute
bronchitis has been suggested by prior pulmonary function tests in patients with this illness.10’11 Furthermore,
investigators have noted an association between recurrent
acute bronchitis and asthma, suggesting that patients with
symptomatic acute bronchitis are prone to bronchospastic disease.14’16 The short-term effectiveness of albuterol
in patients with acute bronchitis suggests that symptoms
from this disorder are caused primarily by bronchospasm
and that the most effective treatments for this disorder are
likely to be bronchodilators.
This study also suggests that antibiotic therapy
added to bronchodilators has little effect on the symptoms
of acute bronchitis. Although antibiotics are not recommended by experts for acute bronchitis,16’17 antibiotics
are still commonly prescribed by primary care physicians.4’5 While some evidence suggests that antibiotic use
in patients identified with Mycoplasma infections can be
useful,18 it appears from these data that MDI-delivered
albuterol is a more effective and safer treatment for patients with acute bronchitis. More research will be needed
The Journal of Family Practice, Vol. 39, No. 5(Nov), 1994
439
Aerosolized Albuterol for Acute Bronchitis Hueston
to determine whether antibiotic therapy results in improved outcomes in certain patient populations treated
with bronchodilator agents.
Although the results of this study are encouraging,
the conclusions should be viewed within the limitations of
the methods. First, the definition of acute bronchitis is
vague.19 While the clinical characteristics of the patients
randomized to the two intervention groups appeared
equal, the broad definition of acute bronchitis employed
in this study may have masked important differences between these two groups. Second, the small number of
subjects enrolled in the study does not allow suitable
power to compare variables other than the primary outcome of cough. It is possible that small differences between the groups that were not statistically significant
would reach significance with a larger patient population.
Finally, this study was limited to healthy adults and relied
on outcomes self-reported by these persons. It is unclear
how effective albuterol might be for acute bronchitis in
children or adults with underlying pulmonary disorders.
Further evaluation of bronchodilators in patients with
acute bronchitis with a focus on special populations, such
as smokers, children, and patients with underlying pulmonary problems or recurrent bronchitis, would help define
the most effective use of this treatment modality.
Although this study did not employ any objective
measures of pulmonary function, such as peak flows, the
clinical outcomes used are indicative of desired endpoints
by most patients with bronchitis. While it might be convincing to demonstrate reversible airway obstruction in
these individuals, the most clinically relevant outcomes
are probably those that relate to patient function, which
include ability to work and freedom from cough. For
these outcomes, only patient self-report was available. It is
possible that the results could be biased by patients reporting improved outcomes in order to please their physicians; however, since patients were blinded to their medication, both placebo and albuterol results would have
been equally affected and no bias favoring the treatment
group would have resulted.
Acknowledgments
This study was funded by a grant from the American Academy of family
Physicians.
The author would like to thank the staff and physicians at Menifee
Medical Center in Frcnchburg, Kentucky, and Eau Claire Family
Medicine, in Eau Claire, Wisconsin, for referral of patients for this
study.
References
1. Rosenblatt RA, Cherkin DC, Schnessweiss R, Hart GL, Greenwald
H, Kirkwood CR, Perkoff GT. The structure and content of family
practice: current status and future trends. J Earn Pract 1982; 15
681-722.
2. Marsland DW, Wood M, Mayo F. Content of family practice, pan
1: rank order of diagnoses by frequency. J Fam Pract 1976; 3:37-
68.
3. Kirkwood CR, Clure HR, Brodsky R, Gould GH, Knaak R, Metcalf
M, Romeo S. The diagnostic content of family practice: 50 most
common diagnoses recorded in the WAMI community practices.!
Fam Pract 1982; 15:485-92.
4. Verheij TJ, Hermans J, Kaptein AA, et al. Acute bronchitis: general
practitioners’ views regarding diagnosis and treatment. Fam Pract
1990; 7:175-90.
5. Nelson EC, Kirk JW, Bise BW, Chapman RJ, Hale FA, Stamps PL,
Wasson JH. The cooperative information project, part 2: some
initial clinical, quality assurance, and practice management studies.
J Fam Pract 1981; 13:867-76.
6. Dunlay J, Reinhardt R, Rol LD. A placebo-controlled, doubleblind trial of erythromycin in adults with acute bronchitis. ] Earn
Pract 1987; 25:137-41.
7. Brickfield FX, Carter WH, Johnson RE. Erythromycin in the treatment of acute bronchitis in a community practice. J Fam Pract
1986; 23:119-22.
8. Franks P, Gleiner JA. The treatment of acute bronchitis with trimethoprim /sulfamethoxazole. J Fam Pract 1984; 19:185-90.
9. Williamson HA. A randomized, controlled trial of doxycyclinc in
the treatment of acute bronchitis. J Fam Pract 1984; 19:481-6.
10. Williamson HA. Pulmonary function tests in acute bronchitis: evidence for reversible airway obstruction. J Fam Pract 1987; 25:
251-6.
11. Boldy DA, Skidmore SJ, Ayres JG. Acute bronchitis in the commit
nity: clinical features, infective factors, changes in pulmonary function and bronchial reactivity to histamine. Respir Med 1990; 84:
377-85.
12. Hueston WJ. A comparison of albuterol and erythromycin for the
treatment of acute bronchitis. J Earn Pract 1991; 33:476-80.
13. Mulbye H, Aasebo U, Straume B. Symptomatic effect of inhaled
fenoterol in acute bronchitis: a placebo-controlled double-blind
study. Fam Pract 1991; 8:216-22.
14. Williamson HA, Schultz P. An association between bronchitis and
asthma. J Fam Pract 1987; 24:35-8.
15. Hallctt JS, Jacobs RL. Recurrent acute bronchitis: the association
with undiagnosed bronchial asthma. Ann Allergy 1985; 55:568-
70.
16. Koster F. Acute bronchitis. In: Barker LR, Burton JR, Zieve PI),
eds. Principles of ambulatory medicine. Baltimore, Md: Williams 8:
Wilkins, 1989:227-8.
17. Gwaltney JM. Acute bronchitis. In: Mandell GI, Douglas RG, Bennett JE, eds. Principles and practice ofinfcctious disease. New York:
John Wiley & Sons, 1985:385-7.
18. King DE, Williams WC, Haggerty J, Denning C. Treatment of j
acute bronchitis in primary care. Abstract presented at North Amer
ican Primary Care Research Group, November 1993, San Diego.
Calif.
19. Verheij TMJ, Kaptein AA, Mulder JD. Acute bronchitis: aetiology,
symptoms and treatment. Fam Pract 1989; 6:66-9.
440 The Journal of Family Practice, Vol. 39, No. 5(Nov), 1994