Article Preview :
Background. Clinical trials have not shown a consistent benefit of treating bronchitis with antibiotics. Many physicians, however, treat acute bronchitis with antibiotics because of the possibility of Mycoplasma pneumoniae or other pathogens. The objectives of this study were to determine the effectiveness of crythromycin treatment in patients with acute bronchitis and to determine whether a newly developed rapid M pneumoniae antibody test is useful in predicting which patients will respond to therapy.

Methods. We conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial at three primary care centers in North Carolina. A convenience sample of 140 patients presenting with acute bronchitis were tested for M pneumontae, 91 of whom were treated with either erythromycin 250 mg four times daily for 10 days or an identical-appearing placebo.

Results. Patients treated with erythromycin missed an average of only 0.81[+ or -]1.1 days of work compared with 2.16[+ or -]3.2 days for placebo-treated patients (P<.02). There were no significant differences in cough, use of cough medicine, general feeling of well-being, or chest congestion between the erythromycin and placebo groups. Twenty-five percent of the patients tested positive for M pneumoniae. There were no differences in response to erythromycin based on whether the patient had a positive test for M pneumoniae.

Conclusions. Erythromycin is effective in significantly reducing lost time from work, but it is not effective in reducing cough or other symptoms in patients with acute bronchitis, regardless of the outcome of the M pneumoniae antibody test.

Key words. Bronchitis; crythromycin; pneumonia, mycoplasma, treatment outcome. J Fam Pract 1996; 42:601-605)

Acute bronchitis ranks among the 10 most common illnesses seen in office practice, and its diagnosis and treatment are associated with substantial costs in both time and money.[1-3]

The cause of acute bronchitis is unclear in most cases.[4,5] Epidemiologic studies from various clinical settings document the role of respiratory viruses, including rhinovirus, coronavirus, adenovirus, and influenza virus, in addition to Mycoplasma pneumoniae.[6-10] Gram's stain and standard bacterial culture have not been helpful in identifying bacterial causes or predicting which cases might respond to antibiotics,[11-13] and most randomized controlled trials do not show a significant benefit of treating acute bronchitis with antibiotics.[4,11-15]

Mycoplasma pneumoniae causes approximately 20% of cases of community-acquired pneumonia.[16-18] Some epidemiologic evidence suggests that the incidence of M pneumoniae bronchitis is 23 times that of mycoplasmal pneumonia.[18] Using retrospective serologic methods, prevalence rates among patients with acute bronchitis have ranged between 5% and 27%.[19-21] Using a newer rapid diagnostic method based on antibody detection and latex agglutination, however, the prevalence was 43% in a study of rural family practice patients.[22]

The objectives of this study were twofold: (1) to determine the effectiveness of crythromycin treatment in patients with acute bronchitis, and (2) to determine whether a newly developed rapid M pneumoniae antibody test is helpful in predicting which patients will respond to erythromycin therapy. The major hypothesis was that crythromycin would be effective in the treatment of unselected patients with acute bronchitis, as exhibited by improvement in cough and measures of general well-being.