Abstract We assessed the risk of multiple sclerosis (MS) associated with a series of putative risk factors. We studied 140
patients (90 women) with MS (mean age, 42.1 years; SD=10.2
years; disease duration, 10.9 years, SD=7.5 years) and 131 sexand age-matched controls. Using a structured questionnaire, we
collected information related to demographic data, socio-economic status, education, ethnicity, changes of domiciles,
migration, occupation, environmental, nutritional and hormonal factors, exposure to various bacterial and viral agents, vaccinations, and family history of diseases. In multiple logistic
regression analysis, we found independent risk factors of MS
to be: familiarity for MS (OR=12.1; 95% CI, 1.3–110.7),
autoimmune diseases (OR=3.8; 95% CI, 2.0–7.1) and migraine
(OR=8.7; 95% CI, 1.0–75.4); comorbidity with autoimmune
disease (OR=6.8; 95% CI, 1.4–32.0) and migraine (OR=13.5;
95% CI, 1.5–116.6); and vaccination against measles
(OR=92.2; 95%, 12.1–700.2). Familial susceptibility to MS,
autoimmune diseases and migraine, and vaccination to measles
are associated with an increased risk of MS. The data collected
in this study are confirmatory and support the hypothesis that
etiology of MS constitutes the effect of interplay between
genetic and environmental risk factors. However, the relatively
small number of cases and controls prevents firm conclusions.
Key words Multiple sclerosis • Environmental risk factors •
Familial risk factors • Case-control study
Introduction
The study of risk factors may provide a clue to the etiology
of multiple sclerosis (MS), which is still unknown. In this
disease, the underlying pathology is consistent with an
autoimmune response to some components of myelin, but it
is not clear which factors trigger the immune reaction
against myelin. Epidemiological studies have suggested a
role for genetic [1] and non-genetic [2] risk factors in the
etiology of MS. Among non-genetic factors, exposure to
infections [3] or chemical and physical agents [4], vaccinations [5], hormonal factors [6], nutritional habits [7], physical trauma [8] and psychological stress [9] are the most
studied.
A widely accepted hypothesis suggests that MS has a
multifactorial etiology in which both genetic and environmental factors are involved. In this view, the disease is
caused by an autoimmune process that is triggered, in susceptible individuals, by the exposure to one or several
environmental factors [10, 11]. To investigate the influence
of environmental and familial risk factors in the etiopathogenesis of MS, we assessed the risk of developing MS
associated with a series of putative risk factors in a casecontrol study.
Materials and methods
We considered for participation in the study 158 consecutive
patients (100 women and 58 men) affected by MS [12]. Patients
who were being seen in routine follow-up at the Multiple Sclerosis
Center of the University of Trieste, Italy, were asked to participate
in the study. Ten patients (7 women) with cognitive impairment
were excluded from the study. Eight patients (3 women) refused to
participate. Hence, 140 patients (90 women) of mean age 42.1
years (SD=10.9 years; range, 17–65 years) were included, corresponding to 88.6% of the initial population. A total of 100 patients
(71.4%) had a relapsing-remitting form of MS, 27 (19.3%) had a
Neurol Sci (2003) 24:242–247
DOI 10.1007/s10072-003-0147-6
M. Zorzon • R. Zivadinov • D. Nasuelli • P. Dolfini • A. Bosco • A. Bratina • M.A. Tommasi • L. Locatelli
G. Cazzato
Risk factors of multiple sclerosis: a case-control study
ORIGINAL
Received: 24 April 2003 / Accepted in revised form: 18 August 2003
M. Zorzon () • R. Zivadinov • D. Nasuelli • A. Bosco
A. Bratina • M.A. Tommasi • L. Locatelli • G. Cazzato
Department of Clinical Medicine and Neurology
Clinical Neurology Unit, Cattinara Hospital
University of Trieste
Strada di Fiume 447, I-34149 Trieste, Italy
P. Dolfini
Blood Transfusion Center, Trieste, Italy
M. Zorzon et al.: Risk factors of multiple sclerosis 243
secondary-progressive form and 13 (9.3%) had a primary-progressive form. The median expanded disability status scale (EDSS)
[13] score was 2.0. Mean disease duration was 10.9 years (SD=7.5
years).
The control group was formed by 140 sex- and age-matched
(±2 years) blood donors, chosen among the subjects recorded at the
local Blood Transfusion Center between 11 January and 13
February 2001. The subjects whose date of birth was closer to that
of cases were selected. The controls were similar to the cases
regarding the area of residence and ethnicity. Nine subjects refused
to participate, thus the control group comprised 131 subjects (rate
of participation, 93.6%). Patients and controls gave informed consent to the study.
Using a structured questionnaire in a face-to-face interview, we
collected detailed information related to: demographics of the subject and his family; socio-economic status; education; ethnicity;
occupation; handedness; changes of domiciles; migration; environmental, nutritional and hormonal factors; exposure to bacterial
and viral agents and to chemicals; vaccinations; smoking habit;
accidental or surgical trauma; anaesthesia; contact with animals
and pets; familial history (first-degree relatives) for MS, autoimmune diseases and other diseases; and comorbidity with migraine
and autoimmune diseases. The interview was performed and the
questionnaire was compiled by two medical students after an
appropriate period of training and when an adequate interobserver
agreement was achieved. The interviewers were not aware of the
study hypothesis and design. Information on exposures and family
history was supplemented by an interview with a reliable relative
or supported by documentation. Exposure to environmental risk
factors was considered prior to disease onset in cases and during
the same period of time in controls. Exposure to chemicals was
considered when lasting ≥5 years.
Statistical analysis was performed using the Statistical Package
for the Social Sciences (SPSS, version 10.1). Student’s t test, chisquare test and Fisher’s exact test were used, as appropriate. The
odds-ratio (OR) associated with each potential risk factor and the
95% confidence interval (CI) were calculated. To test interactions
among variables, multiple logistic regression analysis was applied
in various models using MS as the dependent variable and the
socio-economic, environmental and familial variables as the independent ones. The minimum significance level for entry and for
staying in the equation was 0.05. All p values were based on twotailed tests.
Results
We evaluated environmental and familial risk factors in 140
subjects with MS and in 131 age- and sex-matched controls.
Cases and controls were well balanced as for marital status,
blood group, age at onset of menstruation, place of birth,
nationality, ethnicity, socio-economic status, changes of
domiciles in childhood and migration (data not shown).
The results of the univariate analysis are presented in
Table 1. The variables associated with a significant risk of
MS included: contact with animals in general and with pet
birds and fowls in particular; consumption of meat five or
more time per week; vaccination against measles, rubella,
mumps and varicella; right-handedness; family history of
MS, autoimmune disease, thyroiditis, rheumatic disorders,
diabetes mellitus and migraine; and comorbidity with
autoimmune diseases and migraine. Antecedent infectious
diseases, physical trauma, occupational exposures and
exposure to toxins were not associated with MS risk.
Considering the age at infection (i.e. before 7 years of age
and before 15 years of age), no difference was found
between cases and controls. Smoking habit yielded contradictory results, since on a ever/never basis no differences
were found between cases and controls but current smokers
were more frequent among cases, yielding a significant OR.
The mean number of cigarettes smoked per day was not different in cases and controls (14.9 [SD=8.5] vs. 16.1
[SD=8.8]; p=NS). Exposure to pet dogs was associated with
a significant reduction in the risk of MS.
The results of the multivariate analysis are shown in
Table 2. In multiple logistic regression analysis, significant
independent risk factors of MS included: family history of
MS, autoimmune diseases and migraine; comorbidity with
autoimmune diseases and migraine; and vaccination against
measles.
Discussion
The present results indicate that a familial occurrence of MS
is a significant risk factor for the disease, which suggests the
role of a genetic predisposition in the development of MS.
A familial clustering of MS cases has long been recognized,
but how the genetic factors operate remains to be established [2]. The prevailing hypothesis is that there is not a
single major locus which determines the susceptibility to
develop MS, but that a number of different genes confers
susceptibility to the disease (i.e. MS is a polygenic disease).
Only one gene complex of confirmed importance has been
so far identified in the human leukocyte antigenic (HLA)
class II region on the short arm of chromosome 6. Indeed,
many studies have proven that a genetic factor in the HLA
class II region is associated with an increased risk of MS
[14], although several genetic factors other than those related to the HLA region are involved [1].
The increased risk of MS associated with family history
of autoimmune diseases and the occurrence in MS patients
of these diseases suggest that, in some cases, clinically distinct autoimmune diseases may be controlled by a common
set of susceptibility genes. An association of MS and various autoimmune diseases has been reported in individual
patients and some data indicate a possible familial association of MS with Grave’s disease, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis,
Crohn’s disease, rheumatoid arthritis, vitiligo, type 1
(insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus and uveitis. In fact, in
a large French study [15], the family histories of 357 consecutive patients with MS were collected; adequate infor-