1595
CONCISE COMMUNICATIONS
Influenza A Virus Vaccines Containing Purified Recombinant H3
Hemagglutinin Are Well Tolerated and Induce Protective Immune Responses in
Healthy Adults
Douglas C. Powers, Gale E. Smith, Edwin L. Anderson,
Donald J. Kennedy, Craig S. Hackett,
Bethanie E. Wilkinson, Franklin Volvovitz,
Robert B. Belshe, and John J. Treanor
Geriatric Research. Education. and Clinical Center, St. Louis VA
Medical Center. and Department ofInternal Medicine and Center for
Vaccine Development. Saint Louis University. St. Louis. Missouri;
MicroGeneSys. Inc.. Meriden. Connecticut; Infectious Diseases Unit.
University ofRochester. Rochester. New York
This study evaluated the safety, immunogenicity, and protective efficacy of vaccinescontaining
purified recombinant uncleaved hemagglutinin (rHAO)from influenza A/Beijing/32/92 (H3N2)
virus. In a randomized, double-blinded trial, 127 adult volunteers were immunized with 15 J,Lg of
rHAO, 15 J,Lg of rHAO plus alum, 90 J,Lg of rHAO, licensed subvirion vaccine, or saline placebo.
The rHAO vaccines caused fewer local adverse reactions than did the commercial subvirion
preparation. Neutralizing hemagglutinin-specific antibody responses to 15 J,Lg of rHAO were
comparable to those elicited by licensed vaccine, not enhanced by the addition of alum, and
significantly increased by raising the rHAO dose from 15 to 90 J,Lg. Compared with placebo
recipients, rHAO-vaccinated subjects had significantly lower rates of influenza A (H3N2) virus
infection and illness during the epidemic winter season. These results suggest that influenza
vaccines containing purified rHAO may offer an advantage over licensed preparations containing
egg-grown antigens by inducing equivalent protective immune responses while being potentially
less reactogenic.
Epidemic influenza causes significant morbidity and mortality worldwide. Annual immunization of high-risk populations is the most effective measure for reducing the impact of
influenza [1]. Licensed inactivated influenza virus vaccines
confer protection against influenza infection primarily by
stimulating the production of neutralizing antibodies to the
hemagglutinin (HA) glycoproteins of component strains [2].
Currently available influenza vaccines nevertheless have several limitations, including suboptimal immunogenicity and
efficacy in very young or elderly persons, underutilization in
part because of poor patient acceptance related to fears of
adverse reactions [3], and production in chicken eggs.
There are several drawbacks to the use of eggs for virus
replication in the manufacturing process for influenza vaccines. The limited ability of many influenza strains to replicate well in eggs often necessitates the adaptation of wild
type isolates or the use of high-yielding viral reassortants to
Received 28 October 1994; revised 18 January 1995.
Informed consent was obtained from all subjects. The protocols conformed to guidelines for human experimentation ofthe US Department of
Health and Human Services.
Grant support: National Institutes of Health (AI-05051 and AI-05049).
Reprints or correspondence: Dr. Douglas C. Powers. VA Medical Center
(II G-JB). Jefferson Barracks Division. I Jefferson Barracks Dr., S1. Louis.
MO 63125-4199.
The Journal of Infectious Diseases 1995;171:1595-9
© 1995 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved.
0022-1899/95/7106-0029$01.00
mass produce sufficient quantities of antigen. Furthermore,
the growth of influenza viruses in eggs may select variants
that display HA antigenic heterogeneity compared with primary isolates grown in mammalian cells [4, 5]. These antigenic differences between vaccine components and epidemic
strains have resulted in suboptimal levels of protection in
animal models [6]. In addition, the presence of contaminating egg proteins can cause immediate hypersensitivity reactions in persons with egg allergy and may contribute to other
adverse reactions more commonly associated with influenza
vaccine use.
Advances in recombinant DNA technology have made
possible the development of synthetic vaccines that can be
modified at the cDNA level. A subunit influenza vaccine
containing purified recombinant HA antigen produced in
prokaryotic or eukaryotic cells would not be subject to many
of the limitations of current influenza vaccines. Because
there is no requirement for adaptation to eggs, recombinant
HA could be cloned directly from field isolates ofinfluenza
that best represent the epidemic strain(s) ofvirus. Since cloning and production ofrecombinant HAs can be done rapidly,
the selection ofstrains to be incorporated in each year's vaccine could be delayed until relatively late in the season, giving the best opportunity to identify the most representative
antigenic variants. It is also possible that a purified recombinant HA preparation free of egg proteins would be better
tolerated than conventional vaccine or could be administered at higher doses than currently feasible. This study was
 at University of Iowa Libraries/Serials Acquisitions on June 10, 2015 http://jid.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from 
1596 Concise Communications JID 1995;171 (June)
undertaken to characterize the safety and immunogenicity of
an experimental influenza vaccine containing recombinant
HA in humans and to obtain preliminary data regarding the
protective efficacy ofsuch a vaccine against natural infection
during an epidemic season.
Materials and Methods
Vaccines. The recombinant HA vaccines used in this study
contained full-length uncleaved HA (HAO) glycoprotein from
the influenza A/Beijing/32/92 (H3N2) virus. Recombinant
HAO(rHAO) was produced in cultures ofLepidopteran (insect)
cells following infection with a baculovirus vector containing a
cDNA insert encoding the HA gene. The expressed protein was
purified under non denaturing conditions to >95%, as measured
by quantitative scanning densitometry ofthe bulk antigen electrophoresed on SDS-PAGE gels. The identity ofthe peptide was
confirmed by amino acid analysis, N-terminal sequencing, and
Western blot analysis with anti-influenza A/Beijingl32/92 sera.
The rHAO vaccines contained a specified amount of the synthetic HA antigen either dissolved in a PBSsolution or adsorbed
to aluminum phosphate (alum) adjuvant (0.25 mg ofAI+3/dose)
in the form ofa gel suspension. The licensed trivalent subvirion
vaccine used in this study contained 15 JLgldose of each of the
HAs from influenza A/Texas/36/91 (H IN I), A/Beijing/32/92
(H3N2), and B/Panama/45/90 viruses (Fluzone; Connaught
Laboratories, Swiftwater, PA).
Clinical studies. Healthy adults ages 18-45 years were
enrolled at both Saint Louis University and the University of
Rochester. Subjects were randomly assigned to receive one of
the following five vaccine preparations in a double-blinded
manner: 15 JLg of rHAO, 15 JLg of rHAO plus alum, 90 JLg of
rHAO, licensed trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine, or saline
placebo.
Vaccines were administered by intramuscular injection in a
volume of0.5 mL. All subjects were instructed to fill out a daily
report card of adverse reactions, including both local and systemic symptoms, during the first 6 days after vaccination. Symptoms were self-graded as mild, moderate, or severe. Oral temperatures were measured and recorded by participants if they felt
feverish. If present, localized swelling or erythema at the injection site was graded according to whether the area was less than
or greater than the diameter of a quarter. Vaccinations were
done during the last week of November and first week of December in 1993. Serum specimens were obtained at the time of
vaccination, 3 weeks after vaccination, and again in late March
or April 1994 at least 2-3 weeks after influenza viruses were no
longer circulating in the local communities. Volunteers were
instructed to contact the study center if they experienced an
influenza-like illness during the winter influenza epidemic season. An influenza-like illness was defined as the presence ofany
respiratory symptom(s) for ~2 days, accompanied by fever or
systemic symptoms of myalgias or chills. Subjects who reported
influenza-like symptoms had nasal and pharyngeal swabs obtained for virus culture. Specimens were processed in a blinded
fashion.
Serology. For each type of serologic assay, all serum specimens from both institutions were tested in one batch by a single
laboratory. Hemagglutination inhibition (HAl) antibodies to influenza A/Beijing/32/92 (H3N2) whole virus antigen were measured by a standard microtiter assay. Serum HA-specific IgG
antibodies were measured by ELISA, using purified rHAO from
influenza A/Beijing/32/92 (H3N2) as the coating antigen [7].
Neutralizing antibodies were measured using a previously described microneutralization assay [8].
Virology. Nasopharyngeal swab specimens were inoculated
in MDCK or rhesus monkey kidney cells and incubated at 33°C
for 14 days. Hemadsorption of cell mono layers was tested with
0.4% guinea pig erythrocytes. Influenza viruses were identified
in hemadsorption-positive cultures by HAl using H3-specific
antisera (CDC, Atlanta).
Statistical analyses. A significant antibody response to vaccination was defined as a ~4-fold rise in titer between the prevaccination and 3-week postvaccination serum specimens. Laboratory evidence ofinfluenza A (H3N2) virus infection was defined
as either or both of( I) the isolation of virus from nasopharyngeal secretions and (2) a ~4-fold increase in serum HAl antibody titer between the 3-week postvaccination (preseason) specimen collected in December and the corresponding postseason
specimen collected the following spring. Differences between
vaccine groups were analyzed using Fisher's exact test to compare proportions and analysis of variance to compare postvaccination mean reciprocal log2 antibody titers. The modified
Bonferroni's inequality and Dunnett's tests were applied where
appropriate to account for multiple possible comparisons.
Results
Reactogenicity. The rHAO vaccines used in this study
were well tolerated. The frequency of adverse reactions did
not appear to be influenced by the dose of rHAO antigen,
comparing 15 JLg to 90 JLg, but may have been slightly increased (P> .05) by the addition ofalum (table 1). Localized
erythema, pain, and tenderness at the injection site were
each reported significantly more frequently by recipients of
licensed subvirion vaccine than by recipients of either 15 or
90 JLg ofrHAO in saline. With the exception of 1 subject who
experienced moderately severe pain, tenderness, and stiffness in the arm after immunization with licensed vaccine, all
symptoms were graded as mild and were generally 1-2 days
in duration. Localized erythema or induration (or both),
when present, was invariably less than the area of a quarter.
Immunogenicity. Baseline titers of serum HAl antibody
to influenza A/BeijingJ32/92 (H3N2) virus were 1:8 in 64
(50%) ofthe 127 subjects enrolled. Most subjects in each of
the 4 vaccine groups had HA-specific serologic responses
measured by HAl and ELISA (table 2). Postvaccination
titers ofserum HAl antibody were 1:32 in all vaccine recipients except 2 persons given 15 JLg of rHAO and 1 given the
licensed vaccine. Vaccination was likewise associated with
the production of neutralizing antibody in most volunteers.
Mean rises in antibody titers and seroconversion rates tended
to be slightly lower after immunization with 15 JLg ofrHAO
than with licensed vaccine, although these differences were
 at University of Iowa Libraries/Serials Acquisitions on June 10, 2015 http://jid.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from 
JID 1995; 171 (June) Concise Communications 1597
Table 1. Adverse reactions reported by adults after intramuscular
injection of purified recombinant influenza hemagglutinin (rHAD)
vaccines, licensed trivalent subvirion influenza vaccine, or saline
placebo.
not statistically significant. Antibody responses to rHAO
were not enhanced by the addition of alum. Subjects immunized with 90 ILg of rHAO had postvaccination mean HAl
and ELISA IgG antibody titers that were 2- to 5-fold higher
than in any of the other vaccine groups. These differences
were statistically significant when serum HAl titers were
compared.
Protective efficacy. During the period ofsurveillance, 28
influenza-like illnesses were reported by 26 subjects (table
3). Four of these persons (3 of whom had received placebo
and 1 of whom had been immunized with 15 ILg of rHAD)
had influenza A H3 virus isolated from nasopharyngeal cultures. Significant increases in HAl antibody titer to influenza
A/Beijingl32/92 (H3N2) between pre- and postseason
serum specimens were also present in 3 ofthe 4 culture-confirmed cases but not in any other persons who reported illness. The lone rHAO recipient who subsequently developed
laboratory-confirmed influenza illness had the positive culture obtained 31 days after immunization, and had seroconverted from a prevaccination HAl titer of< 1:4 to a postvaccination (preseason) titer of 1:32. Two additional placebo
recipients and 1 volunteer immunized with licensed vaccine
had serologic evidence ofinfection with influenza A (H3N2)
virus during the epidemic season in the absence of clinical
illness. Compared with all subjects who received any rHAD
vaccine as 1 group, a significantly larger proportion of placebo recipients had laboratory-confirmed influenza A
(H3N2) illness (P < .05) or infection (P < .005).
Discussion
These findings indicate that influenza vaccines containing
purified rHAOantigen expressed in insect cells by a recombinant baculovirus are well tolerated and can elicit protective
immune responses in humans. Even at a dose of 90 J.Lg, the
rHAO evaluated in this study WdS no more reactogenic than
saline placebo and caused significantly fewer local adverse
reactions than did a licensed trivalent subvirion vaccine containing halfas much (i.e., 45 J.Lg) total HA antigen. Conventional inactivated influenza virus vaccines have generally
Table 2. Serum antibody responses in adults after immunization with vaccines containing purified recombinant hemagglutinin (rHAD)
from influenza A/Beijingl32/92 (H3N2), licensed trivalent subvirion vaccine containing 151J.g of HA from A/Beijingl32/92 (H3N2), or
saline placebo.
NOTE. HAl, hemagglutination inhibition; HA, hemagglutinin. Postvaccination serum specimens were obtained 3 weeks after immunization. Antibody
titers are expressed as mean reciprocal log, ± SE. Statistical comparisons are between mean postvaccination HAl titer of designated group and that of 90-JLg
rHAO vaccine group by analysis of variance with Dunnett's test for multiple comparisons.
* p < .0 I; t P < .05; :j;p< .00 I.
 at University of Iowa Libraries/Serials Acquisitions on June 10, 2015 http://jid.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from 
1598 Concise Communications JID 1995;171 (June)
Table 3. Rates ofinfluenza A (H3N2) virus epidemic-associated
illness and infection in adults immunized with purified recombinant influenza hemagglutinin (rHAO) vaccines, licensed trivalent
subvirion influenza vaccine, or saline placebo.
No. (%) ofsubjects with
Laboratory Laboratory
confirmed evidence
Influenza-like influenza of influenza
Vaccine type (n) illness* illness! infectionrHAO
15 J.Lg (26) 4 (15) I (4) I (4)
15 J.Lg plus alum (25) 9 (36) 0 0
90 J.Lg (26) 3 (12) 0 0
Licensed subvirion (26) 4 (15) 0 I (4)
Placebo (24) 6 (25) 3 (13)* 5 (21)11
* Any new respiratory symptom(s) of ~2 days plus fever or systemic
symptoms (or both).
t Influenza-like illness plus isolation of influenza virus or non-vaccine
induced seroresponse to influenza virus (or both).
t Isolation of influenza virus or non-vaccine-induced seroresponse to influenza virus (or both).
*p < .05, lip < .005 placebo recipients vs. all subjects who received any
rHAO vaccine (Fisher's exact test).
been associated with minor local reactions among adults in
placebo-controlled trials [9, 10], although usually at a lower
frequency than experienced by our volunteers.
Neutralizing HA-specific antibody responses to the 15-J.Lg
rHAO preparation were comparable to those elicited by subvirion vaccine and were significantly improved by raising the
dose to 90 J.Lg. Of note, the use of uncleaved rather than
cleaved HA in the recombinant vaccine did not prevent the
induction of functional antibody. Additional studies are
needed to more thoroughly characterize the dose response to
rHAO, particularly in older high-risk persons and previously
vaccinated persons who are less likely to respond when reimmunized with influenza vaccines containing relatively small
amounts ofHA antigen. It will also be ofinterest to evaluate
whether immune responses to individual rHAOs from two or
more different viruses are altered if the antigens are administered together as a multivalent preparation.
Although underreporting of illness during the epidemic
season may have partly accounted for the relatively low clinical attack rate (13%) among our placebo controls, about onethird of all participants had preexisting serum HAl antibody
titers that were already at protective levels. Due to this limitation, together with the small numbers of subjects in each
vaccine group, the study lacked sufficient power to detect a
statistically significant protective efficacy of any single vaccine versus placebo. Combining the data for all rHAO-vaccinated subjects, rates of infection and illness resulting from
natural exposure to the circulating strain of influenza A
(H3N2) virus were significantly lower than among placebo
recipients. These results should be regarded as preliminary
but nonetheless suggest that protective immunity conferred
by rHAO, particularly when administered at high doses, is at
least comparable to that induced by currently available licensed vaccines.
A theoretical concern regarding the use of a baculovirus
expression system for production ofrHAOis related to differences in glycosylation between the insect cell-derived recombinant glycoprotein and native HA [II]. Since carbohydrate
moieties are known to modulate the antigenic and functional
properties ofinfluenza HA [12, 13], the pattern ofglycosylation may be an important determinant ofimmunoprotective
responses to this viral antigen. Our data suggest, however,
that the glycosylation pattern of native influenza HA does
not necessarily need to be preserved for the induction of
functional protective antibodies.
Another potential drawback ofrHAO vaccines is their inability to stimulate immune responses against non-HA antigens, particularly neuraminidase (NA), which also has a role
in protection from influenza infection and is present in conventional inactivated influenza whole virus or subvirion preparations [14, 15]. The results of this study demonstrate that
NA is not required for the protective efficacy of influenza
vaccination in healthy adults. Synthetic vaccines containing
purified recombinant NA in addition to rHAO may nonetheless provide more complete protection than does rHAO
alone, particularly for high-risk populations less likely to respond well to vaccination.
Acknowledgments
We thank Joan Cannon, Diane O'Brien, and Mary Ann Riley
for assistance with clinical aspects ofthis study and Mary Manning and Ruth Simons for technical assistance in the laboratory.
References
I. Immunization Practices Advisory Committee. Prevention and control
ofinfluenza: part I, vaccines. Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1993;42: 1-14.
2. Ada GL, Jones PD. The immune response to influenza infection. Curr
Top Microbiol Immunol 1986; 128: I-54.
3. Nichol KL, Lofgren RP, Gapinski J. Influenza vaccination: knowledge,
attitudes, and behavior among high-risk outpatients. Arch Intern
Med 1992;152:106-10.
4. Robertson JS, Bootman JS, Newman R, et at. Structural changes in the
haemagglutinins which accompany egg adaptation of an influenza A
(HINI) virus. Virology 1987;160:31-7.
5. Katz JM, Naeve CW, Webster RG. Host cell-mediated variation in
H3N2 influenza viruses. Virology 1987; 156:386-95.
6. Katz JM, Webster RG. Efficacy of inactivated influenza virus (H3N2)
vaccines grown in mammalian cells or embryonated eggs. J Infect
Dis 1989; 160: 191-8.
7. Murphy BR, Phelan MA, Nelson DL, et at. Hemagglutinin-specific ..
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for antibodies to influenza A
and B viruses. J C1in MicrobioI1981;13:554-60.
8. Treanor JJ, Betts RF. Evaluation oflive attenuated cold-adapted influenza B/Yamagata/16/88 reassortant virus vaccine in healthy adults.
J Infect Dis 1993; 168:455-9.
 at University of Iowa Libraries/Serials Acquisitions on June 10, 2015 http://jid.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from 
JID 1995; 171 (June) Concise Communications 1599
9. Quinnan GV, Schooley R, Dolin R, Ennis FA, Gross P, Gwaltney JM.
Serologic responses and systemic reactions in adults after vaccination
with monovalent A/USSR/77 and trivalent A/USSR/77, A/Texas/
77, B/Hong Kong/72 influenza vaccines. Rev Infect Dis
1983;5:748-57.
10. Margolis KL, Nichol KL, Poland GA, Pluhar RE. Frequency ofadverse
reactions to influenza vaccine in the elderly. A randomized. placebocontrolled trial. JAMA 1990;264:1139-41.
II. Luckow VA, Summers MD. Trends in the development ofbaculovirus
expression vectors. Biotechnology 1988;6:47-55.
12. Skehel 11, Stevens OJ, Daniels RS, et al. A carbohydrate side chain on
hemagglutinins of Hong Kong influenza viruses inhibits recognition
by a monoclonal antibody. Proc Nat! Acad Sci USA 1984;81: 1779-
83.
13. Gallagher P, Henneberry J, Wilson IA, Sambrook J, Gething MJ. Addition of carbohydrate side chains at novel sites on influenza virus
hemagglutinin can modulate the folding, transport, and activity of'
the molecule. J Cell Bioi 1988; 107:2059-73.
14. Murphy BR. Kasel JA, Chanock RM. Association of serum anti-neuraminidase antibody with resistance to influenza in man. N Engl J
Med 1972;268: 1329-32.
15. Kendal AP, Noble GR, Dowdle W. Neuraminidase content of influenza vaccines and neuraminidase antibody responses after vaccination ofimmunologically primed and unprimed populations. J Infect
Dis 1977;136:S415-24.
Dramatic Interstrain Differences in the Replication of Human Cytomegalovirus
in SCID-hu Mice
Janice M. Brown, Hideto Kaneshima,
and Edward S. Mocarski
Departments ofMicrobiology and Immunology and ofMedicine. Stanford
Universitv School ofMedicine. Stanford, and Svstemix. Inc ..
Palo Alto. California
The ability of a low-passage strain (Toledo) and laboratory strains (AD169 and Towne) of
human cytomegalovirus to replicate in SCID-hu (thymus plus liver) mice were compared. At a
time of peak replication, 14 days after inoculation, the Toledo strain grew 2-3 orders ofmagnitude "better than any laboratory strain, a difference reflecting the number of infected thymic
stromal cells in the implants. The growth property of the Toledo strain was stable through serial
passage and plaque purification. The AD 169-ATCC strain failed to grow at all, while an independently maintained stock of this strain obtained from the United Kingdom replicated t"J low levels,
suggesting that divergence had occurred during propagation in different locations. This work
predicts the existence of viral genetic determinant(s) for growth in tissues that are lost during
propagation in culture.
Human cytomegalovirus (CMV) is the most common viral
cause of congenital infection and a major cause of opportunistic infection in immunocompromised patients [I]. There
are a large number ofCMV strains in circulation, as demonstrated by strain-to-strain restriction site [2] or nucleotide
sequence [3] polymorphisms, but the extent to which strains
differ in virulence or accumulate attenuating mutations
when propagated in human fibroblast cell culture remains
Received 25 August 1994; revised II January 1995.
Presented in part: International Herpesvirus Workshop. Pittsburgh. 25-
30 July 1993. American Federation for Clinical Research, Baltimore. 1-3
May 1994.
Grant support: National Institutes of Health (HL-33811, AI-07328) and
American Philosophical Society Daland Fellowship.
This study was approved by both the Human Subjects Review and Animal Protocol Committees of Stanford University and System ix, Inc.
Reprints or correspondence: Dr. Edward Mocarski. Dept. of Microbiology and Immunology, Fairchild Science Bldg., 0347. Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford. CA 94305-5402.
The Journal of Infectious Diseases 1995;171:1599-603
© 1995 by The University ofChicago. All rights reserved.
0022-1899/95/7106-0030$01.00
unknown. To evaluate interstrain differences, we compared
the growth potential of highly passaged laboratory strains,
Towne and AD 169, to a low-passage strain, Toledo. Both
laboratory strains had been serially passaged in human fibroblasts with the initial intent to attenuate their virulence, and
the Toledo strain had been used as a challenge virus in
Towne vaccine studies [4, 5]. A dose as small as 10 pfu of
Toledo strain caused disease, whereas a dose as high as 104
pfu ofTowne strain was innocuous in human volunteers [4].
A number of investigators, particularly those studying viral
interactions with differentiated cell types [6, 7], have suggested that CMV loses full biologic potential after extensive
passage in human fibroblasts.
The genetically immunodeficient C.B-17 (scid/scid) strain
of mice readily accepts xenografts of human tissues, and
these mice have been denoted SCID-hu [8]. Human fetal
thymus plus liver (Thy /Liv) implanted under the kidney capsule has been shown to function as a hematopoietic organ [8]
and to provide an alternative opportunity to study speciesspecific pathogens such as human immunodeficiency virus
type I [9] and CMV [10]. Human CMV strains (Towne or
 at University of Iowa Libraries/Serials Acquisitions on June 10, 2015 http://jid.oxfordjournals.org/ Downloaded from 