19
ACUPUNCTURE IN MEDICINE 2001;19(1):19-26.
www.medical-acupuncture.co.uk/aimintro.htm
Summary
Acupuncture is becoming a common technique
within the physiotherapy profession as a treatment
modality for pain relief; however, few randomised
controlled trials have been undertaken to assess
the effectiveness of acupuncture, particularly in
the treatment of osteoarthritis (OA) of the hip.
Therefore, a randomised trial to compare the
effectiveness of acupuncture with advice and
exercises on the symptomatic treatment of OA of
the hip was carried out. Thirty-two patients
awaiting a total hip arthroplasty were randomly
allocated to either the experimental group, (A), to
have six sessions of acupuncture each lasting up to
25 minutes, or the control group, (B), to be given
advice and exercises for their hip over a six week
period. Group A consisted of three men and 13
women, and group B consisted of four men and
eight women. The average age in group A was 66
years and in group B it was 68 years. Patients were
assessed for pain and functional ability, using a
modified version of the WOMAC questionnaire,
pre-treatment, immediately post-treatment and at
eight weeks post-treatment.
The pre-treatment WOMAC scores in the two
groups were similar (p=0.85). There was a
significant improvement in group A (decrease in
WOMAC score) immediately post-treatment
(p=0.002) and this was maintained at the eightweek follow-up (p=0.03). There were no
significant changes in group B. When the changes
in WOMAC scores were compared between
groups, a significantly greater improvement was
found between pre-treatment and immediately
post-treatment in group A, compared with group B
(p=0.02). The changes between pre-treatment and
the eight-week follow-up also showed a
significant improvement in group A compared
with group B (p=0.03).
In conclusion, this trial supports the hypothesis
that acupuncture is more effective than advice and
exercises in the symptomatic treatment of OA of
the hip.
Keywords
Acupuncture, pain relief, osteoarthritis, hip joint,
exercises, randomised controlled trial.
Introduction
Osteoarthritis (OA) is an extremely common
disease. In an ageing population, one in five
individuals suffer from OA.1 The underlying
disease process involves destruction of the
articular cartilage leading to proliferation and
remodelling of the subchondral bone.2 Patients
present with pain, swelling and stiffness, causing a
reduction in functional ability, particularly if a
weight-bearing joint is affected.3
Conservative treatment of OA is aimed at pain
relief through the use of anti-inflammatory drugs.
Side effects from such drugs have been
documented to include gastrointestinal
haemorrhage, renal toxicity and an increased risk
of hypertension.4
Another form of conservative treatment is
physiotherapy. Current treatment focuses on
advice and education about the disease process,
how patients can help themselves, the latter having
been identified as an important part of treating
OA,5 and stretching and strengthening exercises
for the muscles around the pelvis, aimed at
stabilising the joint.5 King (1997) suggests that
Papers
A Comparison of Acupuncture with Advice and
Exercises on the Symptomatic Treatment of
Osteoarthritis of the Hip – A Randomised
Controlled Trial
Roisin Haslam
Roisin Haslam
senior physiotherapist
Princess Margaret
Hospital
Swindon
haslamroisin@
hotmail.com
Downloaded from http://aim.bmj.com/ on May 17, 2015 - Published by group.bmj.com
this form of management may help to extend the
time before a total hip replacement is necessary.6
Patients can wait many months for surgery,
during which time the disease process progresses,
and the patients’ quality of life decreases.
This may be one reason why patients and
practitioners are seeking alternative or
complementary treatments for the symptoms
of OA.
Acupuncture is becoming increasingly popular
in the symptomatic treatment of OA. In the
United Kingdom, it has been reported that
between 25 to 54% of patients with OA have
sought alternative practitioners.7
Few studies exist on the effectiveness of
acupuncture and OA of the hip.8 Ernst (1997)
performed a systematic review of studies on
acupuncture as a symptomatic treatment of OA:2
a Medline search (1966-96) and a search of a
database specialising in complementary medicine
highlighted 13 studies. Most of the studies used
pain scales as outcome measures and employed
formula acupuncture (predefined set of points).
The review found inconsistencies in the
effectiveness of acupuncture to relieve pain.
Seven of the studies reported an apparent relief of
pain compared with the control groups,9-15 whilst
the other six did not.16-20;27 Of the former seven,
however, several failed to control for placebo
effects, some were not randomised trials, had
small sample sizes and lacked formal statistical
analysis. Such factors jeopardise the quality of the
research and indicate the need for further
randomised controlled trials to determine the
specific efficacy of acupuncture on pain relief in
this condition.
As a consequence of this lack of research, and
a trend found in the researcher’s own practice, it
was decided to investigate the treatment of OA of
the hip with acupuncture, compared with one type
of current physiotherapy practice.
A randomised trial was designed, the null
hypothesis being that there was no difference
between acupuncture and advice and exercises in
the symptomatic treatment of OA of the hip.
Method
This trial was conducted with a group of 32
patients on the waiting list for a total hip
arthroplasty. The number of patients was derived
from those available at the time of the study,
given the author’s time and resource constraints,
rather than from a formal power analysis.
Swindon Research Ethics Committee approved
the study and all patients gave informed consent
prior to the start of the trial. All patients included
in the study had radiographic changes consistent
with OA. Patients were excluded from the study
if they had rheumatoid arthritis, previous hip
injury or surgery, intra-articular steroid injection
in the last three months, if they were pregnant,
had epilepsy, or had an allergy to metal.
The patients were randomly allocated, using a
random number table, to group A or B, with 16 in
each group. Group A received a course of
acupuncture, and group B received advice and
exercises for their hip. The total study period was
14 weeks. The setting for the study was a
physiotherapy department in a District General
Hospital.
Group A received six sessions of acupuncture.
The first session lasted ten minutes, with the
patient side-lying with their affected hip
uppermost. Acupuncture points used were: GB29,
GB30, GB34, GB43, ST44, LI4 bilaterally, and
four ‘ah shi’ points around the greater trochanter,
in a north, south, east, west formation. The
majority of points chosen were on the Gall
Bladder meridian, which is said to have an
influence on muscles and tendons, and the course
of which passes over the lateral and posterior
aspects of the hip. ST44 and LI4 were chosen
because of their general pain relieving influence,21
and the ‘ah shi’ points to isolate the greater
trochanter and its muscle attachments, which
support the hip. ‘Viva’ sterile disposable
acupuncture needles (0.25mm diameter, 25mm
length) were used. Longer needles were used at
GB30 (0.25mm diamater, 40mm length). The
needles were manufactured by Helio Medical
Supplies Inc, Santa Clara, CA 95050, USA. Each
Papers
20
ACUPUNCTURE IN MEDICINE 2001;19(1):19-26.
www.medical-acupuncture.co.uk/aimintro.htm
Downloaded from http://aim.bmj.com/ on May 17, 2015 - Published by group.bmj.com
needle was manually stimulated for approximately
ten seconds half way through the treatment.
Subsequent sessions lasted 25 minutes, with
manual stimulation of each needle, for
approximately ten seconds, every five minutes.
Each patient received one session per week over a
six-week period. Each session was conducted by
the author at a similar time of day and in the same
room.
Group B attended the department three times
over the same time period. Each session lasted 30
minutes. The first session involved giving each
patient an advice sheet on OA, and on self-help.22
The advice sheet also contained a set of five
exercises that were demonstrated to the patient,3
who then practiced them to the author’s
satisfaction. Three weeks later the patients came
back for a review to check that they were doing
their exercises correctly, and they were advised, if
appropriate, on how to gently progress. Three
weeks later the patients came back for their final
review and were encouraged to continue with the
exercises and follow the advice given. Each
session was conducted by the author at a similar
time of day and in the same room. Neither the
author nor the patients were blinded to the
treatments received.
A slightly modified version of the WOMAC
(Western Ontario and McMaster Universities)
osteoarthritis index was used as the outcome
measure (Appendix 1). A previous study by
Berman et al (1994) used the original
questionnaire as an outcome measure on the
efficacy of traditional Chinese acupuncture in the
treatment of symptomatic knee OA.23 The
WOMAC questionnaire is a three-dimensional,
disease specific, self-administered measure of
health status.24 It defines clinical and patient
relevant symptoms in the areas of pain, stiffness
and physical function in patients with OA of the
hip or knee. It is valid, reliable and sufficiently
sensitive to identify changes in health status
following a variety of interventions including
physiotherapy.24 The questionnaire was given to all
patients in both groups on their first attendance to
establish a baseline of their pain and functional
ability. Levels were measured on a 100mm point
visual analogue scale. There were 16 questions in
total, therefore each subject was scored out of
1600. The greater the WOMAC score, the
more pain and dysfunction the patient reports.
A body chart was also completed to establish
the main area of pain, and this was compared
with subsequent questionnaires to identify
changes in areas of pain post-treatment. Patients
were also asked to state how much analgesia
they took on average per day for the pain in their
hip.
Patients were given back their pre-trial
questionnaire at the end of the six-week period to
establish their score post-treatment. A new
questionnaire was sent to all patients eight weeks
later, to identify any longer term effects of their
treatment.
Data from the questionnaires were tested for
normality, and intra-group comparisons were
performed using the paired t-test. Inter-group
comparisons were performed using the unpaired ttest, and checked with the Mann-Whitney test
where normality of the sample scores was in
question.
Results
Sixteen patients were randomly allocated to
each group at the start of the study. Group A
remained intact but in group B, four patients
withdrew from the study during the intervention
period. One patient was admitted for arthroplasty,
another withdrew after the first session after
having a fall at home, another withdrew after the
first session due to difficulty in getting to the
department because of poor mobility. The fourth
patient attended the first session then did not
attend the second and could not be re-contacted.
Three further patients dropped out of group B
between the post-treatment assessment and the
eight-week follow-up. One reported having had an
arthroplasty and the other two were not
contactable. One patient dropped out of group A
during this period to have a total hip replacement.
Papers
21
ACUPUNCTURE IN MEDICINE 2001;19(1):19-26.
www.medical-acupuncture.co.uk/aimintro.htm
Downloaded from http://aim.bmj.com/ on May 17, 2015 - Published by group.bmj.com
The demographic data for both groups is
illustrated in Table 1.
Analysis confirmed that the data were normally
distributed at all stages, with the exception, in
group A, of the difference in scores between preand immediately post-treatment. No significant
difference was found between the pre-treatment
scores of group A and group B (p=0.85),
confirming that the groups were similar at baseline.
WOMAC scores decreased significantly in
group A from pre- to immediately post-treatment
(p=0.002), and from pre-treatment to the eightweek follow-up (p=0.03)(see figure 1). A
significant difference was found in the pre- to
immediately post-treatment change when the two
groups were compared (p=0.02). This comparison
was made using the unpaired t-test, and the result
confirmed with the Mann-Whitney test, as one of
the sets of figures was non-normal.
Five subjects (31%) in group A, and three
(25%) in group B had reduced their analgesia
intake by the end of the treatment course. At the
eight-week follow-up, four subjects in group A,
and one in group B had maintained this reduction.
Six subjects (38%) in group A, and three (25%)
in group B reported fewer symptoms on their body
chart at the end of the treatment course. At the
eight-week follow-up, three subjects in group A
and one in group B reported the maintenance of
fewer symptoms.
Discussion
To summarise the findings of this study, there was
a significant improvement in pain relief and
function in the acupuncture group compared with
that in the group receiving advice and exercises,
and this benefit lasted for at least two months.
Further, almost a third (31%) of subjects in group
A managed to reduce the analgesic drug intake for
their hip by the end of the treatment session,
compared with only a quarter of those in group B.
These results provide evidence for the
effectiveness of acupuncture compared with a
more traditional approach in the treatment of both
the pain and dysfunction associated with OA of
the hip joint.
There are several limitations to this study.
There was no control for the needle, so this trial is
not able to determine the specific effect of the
needling within the acupuncture intervention. The
sample size was relatively small, and this
questions whether the results can be generalised to
the population as a whole. There was a relatively
high number of dropouts, with seven of the
Papers
22
ACUPUNCTURE IN MEDICINE 2001;19(1):19-26.
www.medical-acupuncture.co.uk/aimintro.htm
Table 1 Demographic Data
Group A Group B
Number of patients 16 12
Male : female ratio 3 : 13 4 : 8
Mean age (yrs) 66 68
Age range (yrs) 39 - 77 57 - 77
Mean duration of symptoms (yrs) 9 6
Table 2 WOMAC Scores
Group A Group B
MEAN SD MEAN SD
Pre-treatment 870* 234 854 187
Post-treatment 696* 248 831 235
Eight-week follow-up 732* 258 878 310
*p<0.05 for the inter-group comparisons of the changes in scores between pre-treatment and
immediately post-treatment, and between pre-treatment and eight-week follow-up.
Figure 1 Mean WOMAC scores for group A and group B
p values represent intra-group changes
900
850
800
750
700
650
600
Group A
Group B
Pre-treatment Post-treatment Eight-weeks follow-up
p=0.002
p=0.03
NS
NS
Downloaded from http://aim.bmj.com/ on May 17, 2015 - Published by group.bmj.com
original 16 patients lost between pre-treatment and
the eight-week follow-up in group B, compared
with the loss of only one from group A. The high
dropout rate may have been prevented by
recruiting patients who had just been put on the
waiting list for total hip arthroplasty, because
the length of the wait is such that they would not
have reached surgery within the trial period.
The dropout rate for group B could also have
been attributed to patients within this group
wanting to have acupuncture and lacking faith in
the advice and exercise intervention, which
requires more co-operation and self-motivation on
the part of the patient. This issue was identified
pre-treatment, and the relevant patients were
offered a course of acupuncture once the trial had
finished.
The outcome measure used in this trial
(WOMAC) has been tested as a valid and reliable
way of measuring health status changes in patients
with OA of the hip and was therefore deemed
appropriate for this trial.24 The modified version
that was used involved asking fewer questions
from the third section of the questionnaire that
covers functional tasks. The researcher identified
specific tasks relevant to the hip, thus keeping the
questionnaire shorter, so that patients were not
daunted by being posed too many questions of a
similar nature. This may have reduced the validity
and reliability of the outcome measure; however,
compared with previous studies, it appears more
valid and reliable than having purely subjective
outcome measures.25
The WOMAC questionnaire can be used with
either a visual analogue scale or a Likert scale. In
validation studies of the questionnaire, the visual
analogue scale proved the slightly more sensitive
of the two, so it was chosen for the current trial.
Some patients reported a difficulty, however, in
translating their subjective levels of pain and
stiffness to a 100mm line, with some patients
reporting subjective changes in pain that were not
consistent with their questionnaires. The
reliability of such data must therefore be
questioned, and in order to try and eliminate this
problem in future research, the Likert scale may be
the more reliable outcome measure to use amongst
this sample group.
It was also decided for the current trial to use
the same questionnaire, post-treatment, that the
patients had completed pre-treatment. Whether
patients should be shown their prior scores
remains controversial. This was addressed as part
of a validation study for the WOMAC, and no
statistically significant differences were found
between blind and informed administration of the
questionnaire.24 Informed administration of the
questionnaire was used in the current trial in an
attempt to make it easier for the patients to judge
their levels of pain and function pre- and posttreatment, because of the difficulties that some of
them experienced in interpreting the visual
analogue scale.
Despite such methodological problems, the
results do seem consistent with other acupuncture
studies, in that there was a significant benefit in
the acupuncture group. McIndoe et al (1995)
compared acupuncture with intra-articular steroid
injections and found that both groups had pain
relief, but that there was no statistically
significance difference between them.8 Gaw et al
(1975) studied the efficacy of acupuncture on OA
pain in 40 subjects.26 The active group received
treatment at classical acupuncture points and the
control group at placebo points. They found that
both groups showed significant improvements in
tenderness and subjective reporting of pain, but
they found no significant difference between the
groups.
Such inconclusive research will continue to cast
doubts on the effectiveness of acupuncture as a
form of pain relief for OA. The findings from the
current trial, however, should encourage its use.
Patients were compliant with treatment, and there
were no reported side-effects. Large numbers of
patients can be treated within a relatively short
space of time, making it time efficient. With some
patients reporting a reduction in analgesia intake
post-treatment, this has potential cost and health
benefit implications for the patient.
Papers
23
ACUPUNCTURE IN MEDICINE 2001;19(1):19-26.
www.medical-acupuncture.co.uk/aimintro.htm
Downloaded from http://aim.bmj.com/ on May 17, 2015 - Published by group.bmj.com
For acupuncture to become a more accepted
form of pain relief for OA of the hip, further
randomised controlled trials need to be
undertaken, with larger sample sizes, adequate
control for the needling intervention, and with
long term follow up. The aim of such research
should be to determine whether acupuncture can
be used as a long-term treatment for the symptoms
of OA of the hip to improve patients’ quality of
life whilst awaiting surgery.
In conclusion, this study shows that
acupuncture is effective in treating the symptoms
of OA of the hip with patients waiting for a total
hip arthroplasty and that such benefits can lasts for
at least two months post-treatment.
Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank Mr J Ivory and Mr S Ward for
their help, support and encouragement through the course of
this study.
Reference list
1. Lawrence RC, Hochberg MC, Kelsy JL, McDuffie FC,
Medsger TA. Estimates of the prevalence of selected
arthritic and musculoskeletal diseases in the United States.
J Rheumatol 1989;16(4):427-41.
2. Ernst E. Acupuncture as a symptomatic treatment of
osteoarthritis. A systematic review. Scand J Rheumatol
1997;26(6):444-7.
3. Fagerson T. The Hip Handbook. Butterwoth-Heinemann;
1998.
4. Griffin FR, Ray WA, Shaffner W. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug use and death from peptic ulcer in
elderly patients. Ann Int Med 1988;109(5):359-63.
5. Dieppe P. Management of hip osteoarthritis. BMJ
1995;311(7009):853-857.
6. King L. Case study: Physical therapy management of hip
osteoarthritis prior to total hip arthroplasty. J Sport Phys
Ther 1997;26(1):35-38.
7. Visser GJ, Peters L, Rasker JJ. Rheumatologists and their
patients who seek alternative care: An agreement to
disagree. Br J Rheumatol 1992;31(7):485-90.
8. McIndoe AK, Young K, Bone ME. A comparison of
acupuncture with intra-articular steroid injection as
analgesia for osteoarthritis of the hip. Acupunct Med
1995;13(2):67-70.
9. Coan RM, Wong G, Coan PL. The acupuncture treatment of
neck pain: a randomised controlled study. Am J Chin Med
1982;9:326-32, in reference 2.
10. Junnila SYT. Acupuncture superior to piroxicam in the
treatment of osteoarthritis. Am J Acupunct 1982;10:341-7,
in reference 2.
11. Loy TT. Treatment of cervical spondylosis. Med J Aust
1983;2:32-4, in reference 2.
12. Petrie JP, Langley GB. Acupuncture in the treatment of
chronic cervical pain. Clin Exp Rheumatol 1983;1:333-5,
in reference 2.
13. Petrou P, Winkler V, Genti G, Balint G. Double blind trial
to evaluate the effect of acupuncture treatment on knee
osteoarthrosis. Scand J Acupunct 1988;3:112-5, in
reference 2.
14. Dickens W, Lewith GT. A single-blind, controlled
and randomised clinical trial to evaluate the effect
of acupuncture in the treatment of trapezometacarpal osteoarthritis. Compl Med Res 1989;3:5-8, in
reference 2.
15. Christensen BV, Ichl IU, Vilbeck H, Bulow HH, Dreijer
NC, Ramussen HF. Acupuncture treatment of severe knee
osteoarthrosis. A long term study. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand
1992;36:519-25, in reference 2.
16. Petrie JP, Hazleman BL. A controlled study of acupuncture
in neck pain. Br J Rheumatol 1986;25:271-5, in reference 2.
17. Ammer K, Petschnig R. Vergleich der wirksamkeit von
akupunktur und physiotherapie bei ambulante gonarthrose
patienten. Wien Med Wochenschr 1988;22:566-9, in
reference 2.
18. Thomas M, Eriksson SV, Lundeberg T. A comparative
study of diazepam and acupuncture in patients with
osteoarthritis pain. Am J Chin Med 1991;14:95-100, in
reference 2.
19. Takeda W, Wessel J. Acupuncture for the treatment of pain
of osteoarthritic knees. Arthritis Care Res 1994;7:118-22,
in reference 2.
20. Fink MG, de Groot M, Kunsebeck HW, Gutenbrunner CH,
Lambrecht F, Gehrke A. Standardized acupuncture v’s
placebo-acupuncture in coxarthrosis. Forrrsch Kompl Med
1996; (abstract) in reference 2.
21. Ellis N. Acupuncture in clinical practice. 1st edition.
Chapman and Hall;1994.
22. Downie A and Tidswell E. Cash’s Textbook of
orthopaedics and rheumatology for physiotherapists. 2nd
edition. Mosby-Year Book Europe;1992.
23. Berman BM, Lao L, Greene M, Anderson R, Wong RH,
Longernberg P, Hochenberg MC. Efficacy of traditional
Chinese acupuncture in the treatment of symptomatic knee
osteoarthritis: a pilot study. Osteoarthritis Cartilage
1995;3(2):139-42.
24. Bellamy N, Buchanan WW, Goldsmith CH, Campbell J,
Stitt L. Validation study of WOMAC: a health status
instrument for measuring clinically important relevant
outcomes to antirheumatic drug therapy in patients with
osteoarthritis of the hip and knee. Br Journal Rheumat
1988;15(12):1833-40.
25. Loy TT. Treatment of cervical spondylosis. Medical
Journal of Austria 1983;3(1):32-4.
26. Gaw AC, Chang LW, Shaw LC. Efficacy of acupuncture
on osteoarthritic pain, A controlled double blind study.
N Eng J Med 1975;293(8):375-78.
24
ACUPUNCTURE IN MEDICINE 2001;19(1):19-26.
www.medical-acupuncture.co.uk/aimintro.htm
Papers
Downloaded from http://aim.bmj.com/ on May 17, 2015 - Published by group.bmj.com
Appendix 1
HIP QUESTIONNAIRE
Please answer the following questions considering the pain / stiffness you have experienced over the last
week in your hip.
All the questions require an answer in the form of a mark on the scale, this is between two extremes.
Please place your mark straight down across the scale, e.g. |
The whole form should not take more than 10 minutes to complete.
1. Please mark on the line your level of pain
a) when walking
none | | extreme
b) stair climbing
none | | extreme
c) at night
none | | extreme
d) at rest
none | | extreme
2. Please mark on the line the degree of stiffness in your hip
a) in the mornings
none | | extreme
b) later in the day
none | | extreme
3. Please mark on the line the level of difficulty you have in performing
a) sit-stand
none | | extreme
b) bending to the floor
none | | extreme
c) walking
none | | extreme
Downloaded from http://aim.bmj.com/ on May 17, 2015 - Published by group.bmj.com
d) putting on socks and tights
none | | extreme
e) sitting
none | | extreme
4. Please mark on the line the level of difficulty you have in your normal leisure activities
none | | extreme
5. Please mark on the line the level at which you generally feel
a) anxious
none | | extreme
b) depressed
none | | extreme
c) relaxed
none | | extreme
d) happy
none | | extreme
6. Please state the name of the medication you take as pain relief for your hip.
7. Please state the average number of these tablets you take daily.
8. Please draw on the chart where you got
pain from your hip in the last week.
THANK YOU FOR COMPLETING
THIS QUESTIONNAIRE
Roisin Haslam
SYMPTOMS
Downloaded from http://aim.bmj.com/ on May 17, 2015 - Published by group.bmj.com
controlled trial
of osteoarthritis of the hip − a randomised
and exercises on the symptomatic treatment
A comparison of acupuncture with advice
Roisin Haslam
doi: 10.1136/aim.19.1.19
Acupunct Med 2001 19: 19-26
http://aim.bmj.com/content/19/1/19
Updated information and services can be found at:
These include:
service
Email alerting box at the top right corner of the online article.
Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article. Sign up in the
Notes
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions
To request permissions go to:
http://journals.bmj.com/cgi/reprintform
To order reprints go to:
http://group.bmj.com/subscribe/
To subscribe to BMJ go to:
Downloaded from http://aim.bmj.com/ on May 17, 2015 - Published by group.bmj.com